Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI December 2024ai.cam.ac.ukIn partnership with:Foreword

AI is at risk of following a well-worn path that results in technological innovations that 
fail to address real-world challenges. We have almost a decade of evidence showing 
what people want from AI. Public dialogues consistently call for AI technologies that 
tackle the challenges that affect our shared health, wellbeing, and prosperity, that 
help strengthen our communities and our personal interactions, and that support 
democratic governance. The last ten years have brought impressive technical advances 
in AI and intense policy activity. However, neither technology or policy development have 
been well connected to social need. 

The AI Opportunities Action Plan has the potential to address the gap between 
technology and widespread public benefit, not only in what policy actions it 
recommends, but in how those recommendations are taken forward. This report starts 
a discussion about how to bridge between the UK’s high-level policy ambitions for AI 
and the development and implementation of technologies and policy frameworks that 
can deliver on those ambitions. 

The next phase of AI policy will need to consider how to centre public interests in AI 
development, how to strengthen governance frameworks that steward AI development 
towards shared public benefit, how to build a public infrastructure for innovation, and 
how to grow the UK’s domestic AI base in a way that delivers real benefits for citizens. 
This report introduces the broad range of levers that government could consider as part 
of its policy agenda for AI. In many of these areas there is an existing evidence base 
about ‘what works’ in technology and policy that Government can draw from. Future 
work by ai@cam will consider these areas for action further.

Across these areas, the report highlights a need to focus on the practical barriers 
to delivering AI-enabled solutions to real-world challenges as part of policy design 
and implementation. The UK has strategic strengths in research and human capital. 
These strengths could be deployed to bridge the gaps between research and 
practice that affect how, where, and for whose benefit AI innovations develop. The 
call in this document is for innovative approaches to open policy development that 
embed stakeholder engagement across the policy lifecycle. By supporting those on 
the frontlines of innovating with AI to deliver public benefit, the UK can generate 
a productivity flywheel that scales AI innovation while closing the gap between 
technological progress and real-world benefit. 

J.Montgomery

Jessica Montgomery, Director, ai@cam, 
University of Cambridge

N.Lawrence

Neil Lawrence, DeepMind Professor 
of Machine Learning, University of 
Cambridge

D.Coyle

Diane Coyle, 

Bennett Professor of Public Policy, 
University of Cambridge

G.Neff

Gina Neff, Professor of Responsible 
AI, Queen Mary University of London, 
Executive Director of the Minderoo Centre 
for Technology & Democracy, University of 
Cambridge, and Deputy CEO, Responsible 
AI UK

 2

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
Summary

AI technologies and policy development are not addressing 
social needs in the way they should. The result is a growing gap 
between AI’s technical capabilities and our ability to deploy 
these capabilities to deliver public benefit. Policy development to 
increase the ‘supply’ of innovative AI technologies is important, 
but needs to be complemented by interventions centred on areas 
of ‘demand’. Policy implementation needs to connect the two. 

understanding of the gaps in current regulatory frameworks, 
or the overlaps between different regulatory remits, risks 
holding back research and investment. A gaps and overlaps 
analysis would be a starting point to giving clearer advice to 
innovators about the regulatory frameworks that apply to 
their work, and to helping regulators build capacity in areas 
of need. 

In its response to the AI Opportunities Action Plan, the UK has 
scope to refresh its national approach to AI. As discussions about 
that Action Plan continue, this policy brief starts by taking stock 
of where further action could help create a world-leading UK 
AI ecosystem. The next phase of AI policy development could 
provide an opportunity to: 

 → Connect to public interests and concerns: We benefit 

from having almost a decade of evidence about people’s 
aspirations and concerns about the development of AI. This 
evidence base shows a demand for innovative solutions 
to the challenges that affect our health, wellbeing, and 
shared prosperity. It also shows a growing concern about 
the need for effective regulation and governance to support 
democratic oversight of technology development and ensure 
AI’s benefits are shared across society. In response, we need 
to do more to connect public voices to AI R&D, and to rally 
efforts to drive progress in AI in areas of need. 

 → Build regulatory capacity for innovation: Regulation can be 
an enabler of AI innovation, giving innovators predictable 
frameworks to develop new AI applications and publics the 
confidence that those innovations are trustworthy. A lack of 

 → Design our public innovation infrastructure to tackle  

real-world problems: Investments in High Performance 
Compute (HPC) Facilities and policy initiatives such as the 
National Data Library offer a route to building a public 
infrastructure for AI innovation. Access to HPC could 
accelerate progress in AI, if these facilities can be made 
accessible to researchers working across diverse application 
areas and connected to secure data environments that 
respect concerns about data confidentiality, security, and 
intellectual property. The National Data Library could provide 
a focal point to unblock access to strategically important 
datasets, if its design is rooted in an understanding of the 
barriers to data access and aligned with public expectations 
around trustworthy data use. Delivering impact from these 
initiatives will require further effort to connect policymakers 
to the practical challenges associated with AI R&D. 
 → Grow the domestic base: A cluster of forthcoming policy 

initiatives are expected to focus on the challenge of building 
the UK’s AI capabilities. In developing new policy agendas on 
support for business, skills and talent, and research funding 
or mission-led innovation, Government has an opportunity 
to work collaboratively with the AI R&D community to both 
build on established evidence bases and learn from on-the-

 3

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI ground experiences of AI innovation. For example, one area 
of growing interest is the use of AI in public services. Previous 
efforts to promote technology adoption in the public sector 
show how top-down initiatives fail. When thinking about 
the role of AI in the public sector, Government today has an 
opportunity to work differently, focusing instead on service 
users and people working on the frontline of delivery.

No matter what path or priority is chosen, success will require a 
shift in how policy is implemented, so that interventions unblock 
the practical barriers to innovating with AI for societal benefit. 
Almost a decade of intense policy interest in AI has struggled to 
connect technology to widespread social and economic benefit. 
The next phase of policy development needs to grapple with the 
challenge of translating high-level policy ambitions into practical 
action that delivers those benefits. 

The UK has strategic advantages in research, in the human 
capital to innovate with AI, and in regulatory institutions that can 
steward AI innovation. There already exists a wealth of evidence 
that Government can draw from in developing practical policy 
interventions in AI. There are also world-leading communities of 
research and practice in the UK that can be engaged to develop 
innovative policy solutions in areas of need. Government now 
needs mechanisms to engage this evidence and research base to 
drive progress through a new wave of open policy innovation. 

 4

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI Contents

Summary

Introduction

Developing a vision for AI

Creating the conditions for effective governance

Building a public innovation infrastructure 

Growing the domestic base

Conclusion

Annexes

Endnotes

3

6

7

10

12

15

18

20

22

 5

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI Introduction

The UK Government’s 2017 AI Review1 was in the first wave 
globally of national government strategies for AI.2 Since 
publication of that review, there have been other policy 
statements aiming to build the UK’s AI capabilities. The AI Sector 
Deal3 and National AI Strategy4 set out frameworks to create 
an enabling environment for AI. The AI Regulation White Paper 
considered regulatory strategies to balance innovation and 
safety.5 New legislation has provided data rights for citizens 
and powers for regulators.6 In the past year, investments in 
safety research started an international conversation about 
the capabilities of frontier AI models.7 Upcoming legislation 
is expected to bring new changes to the governance of data 
sharing in the private and public sectors.8 

Over this period, technological and political changes have shifted 
the opportunities and risks associated with AI, with implications 
for the policies required to steward its development. Progress 
in generative AI has delivered systems that feel more accessible 
to a wider range of users. In the hype surrounding the launch 
of these new AI products, the hope has been they herald a 
new wave of implementation. Whether the huge investments 
being made in generative AI translate into economic benefit, 
however, remains a point of debate.9 Experiences of AI over 
the last ten years demonstrate the difficulties of bridging 
the gap between technology development and real-world 
deployment.10 The political landscape surrounding AI has also 
changed. Internationally, at least 34 countries now have national 
AI strategies,11 AI features regularly on the agenda of meetings 
of G7 and G20 leaders, and there are new calls for global 
governance frameworks.12

Despite these advances in technology, policy, and practice, there 
remains a persistent gap between AI’s technical capabilities and 
the ability to leverage these capabilities for widespread social 
and economic benefit. At a time when the UK is grappling with 
pressing social challenges – from increased demand for health 
and social care, to widening inequalities in educational outcomes 
for students from different backgrounds, to the cost-of-living 
crisis affecting everyday life for many families, and more – there 
is a pressing need for innovative interventions that enable 
economic growth and improve people’s wellbeing. To date, AI has 
played little role in helping tackle any of the complex problems 
facing many societies.13

How AI progresses will be shaped by social, political, and 
economic forces – institutions, people, cultures – that influence 
who develops these technologies, for what purpose, and for 
whose benefit. Autumn 2024’s AI Opportunities Action Plan14 is 
expected to bring with it a new wave of policy development and 
implementation. The opportunity for this next wave of AI policy 
activity is to recentre societal interests and needs. Both ‘what’ 
and ‘how’ matter. This brief considers the policy levers that can 
help Government connect AI development to social and economic 
benefit, including collaborative development of a national vision 
for AI, action to build an infrastructure for public innovation, and 
support to grow the domestic AI base. Across these areas, it calls 
for further action to bridge between technology, policy, and social 
need, so that any new interventions tackle the practical barriers 
to delivering widespread public benefit from AI. 

 6

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI Developing a vision for AI

The UK benefits from a world-leading research base that 
provides an engine for AI innovation and talent, from established 
legal systems and regulatory institutions, and from strengths in 
industries with high potential for AI adoption. These bolster the 
UK’s international competitiveness in AI. For example, research, 
talent, and operating environment were identified as UK 
strengths in the Global AI Index 2024.15 

These strengths could underpin a range of future pathways  
for AI in the UK, including:

 → Innovation: the UK as a science superpower that leads the 
way in AI innovation and its use to accelerate scientific 
discovery.

 → Commercial development: the UK as a hub for growing 

commercial AI systems or applications, linked to an industrial 
strategy that drives domestic development and growth in this 
sector.

 → Assurance: the UK as a world-leader in the development of 
policies, frameworks, and tools for AI safety and assurance, 
securing market leadership in an emerging sector. 

 → Diffusion: the UK as an engine for AI diffusion, with AI tools 

adopted across sectors to increase productivity and translate 
AI innovation into real-world benefits for all in society. 

To help understand public views on the use of AI in public 
services – and the role of AI in delivering priority policy agendas 
in the next parliament – in September 2024, ai@cam convened 
public dialogues on AI and the Missions for Government. In 
collaboration with Hopkins van Mil and the Kavli Centre for 
Ethics, Science, and the Public, dialogue sessions in Liverpool 
and Cambridge asked participants about their aspirations and 
concerns for the use of AI in health, education, energy and net 
zero, and crime and policing.16 

Participants expressed hope that AI could improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of public services; that it could reduce 
administrative burdens on frontline workers and increase the 
time available for public servants to interact with service users, 
delivering positive, personalised experiences (Figure 1). They 
hoped AI could become a ‘co-pilot’ for human decision-makers, 
giving them access to insights from data that could help tailor 
advice and services. They also called for checks-and-balances to 
ensure that AI delivers beneficial outcomes. These included: 

 → Ensuring that AI did not reduce human interaction or 

depersonalise public services; that there is always a human-
in-the-loop, who has the skills to intervene and who is 
empowered to use AI as a decision-support system. 

 → Establishing clear structures for accountability around the 

As the UK Government considers its approach to AI, there is an 
opportunity to refresh our national vision for these technologies. 
A starting point for creating a vision for AI that benefits science, 
citizens, and society is understanding public views on how AI 
could deliver public benefit. 

use of AI, including mechanisms to increase transparency 
around AI use, to allow challenge to its use, and to enable 
redress if things go wrong. 

 → Making sure AI systems are safe, secure, and protect the 

privacy of personal data used during development. 

 7

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  → Developing AI interventions in collaboration with users, 

giving affected communities a voice in AI development and 
designing AI to be accessible for all in society. 

 → Taking action to address power asymmetries surrounding 

the development and use of AI, through legal and regulatory 
safeguards that give independent bodies the power to govern 
the use of AI in different sectors, that act as a counterbalance 
to the dominance of technology companies in this area, and 
that ensure public benefit is prioritised over private profit. 

These findings echo previous public dialogues exploring the 
application and governance of data and AI (Box 1). Despite 
these consistent messages, advances in AI consistently fail to 
deliver on these priorities, either in terms of progress towards 
the application of AI in areas of need or in their governance. 
If this disconnect is allowed to persist over the long-term, it 
creates a risk of widespread loss of confidence in AI, and in those 
institutions tasked with its governance. 

Box 1: Insights from public dialogues about  
data and AI

Public views rarely mirror the binary framings – innovation 
versus regulation, for example, or international AI ‘arms 
races’17 – that have caricatured recent policy debates 
about AI. Dialogues consistently show that publics can see 
benefits from progress in AI, particularly in areas like health 
and science, and believe it is important to have guardrails 
in place to help bring those benefits into being. Context 
matters in determining the nature of the benefits and 
risks that people associate with AI.18 “Who benefits?” is 
consistently raised as a question or concern when evaluating 
the use of AI in a particular area. This question is connected 
to an underpinning scepticism about AI – with some 
suggestions that this scepticism is turning into pessimism – 
that arises from concerns about: 

 → Whether it will be possible to deliver the infrastructure 
or resources to support the use of AI in areas where 
there is potential for public benefit;19 

 → The power of ‘big tech’ in shaping technology 

development, application, and regulation;20 and

 → The equitable distribution of the benefits arising from AI, 
or the likelihood of these technologies benefitting only 
‘the few’.21 

Positive visions for AI propose scenarios where AI is deployed 
in the service of society; where AI helps people live healthier 
lives, increases shared prosperity, and enhances human 
connections. In these visions, AI is deployed to accelerate 
innovations that tackle wicked problems in health, 
sustainability, social inequality, and elsewhere. It becomes 
a tool that supports public sector workers to increase the 
efficiency, effectiveness, and accessibility of public services. 
It is deployed as an enabler of human activities, providing a 
decision-support tool that can enhance the objectivity and 
accuracy of decision-making.22 

To deliver this future, public dialogues highlight a range 
of cross-cutting concerns that must be addressed in AI 
development and implementation. These include: 

 → Security and privacy: Dialogue participants express a 
variety of concerns associated with the use of data in 
AI, and its impact on their personal privacy and security. 
These include concerns about the level of security 
surrounding data management, whether data could 
be stolen or leaked, and the possibility of their personal 
data being sold to private companies without their 
consent.23 

 → Impact on employment: Fears of job losses from AI-
enabled automation are a strong feature of most 
public dialogue exercises. People can already see how AI 
might affect their work and can imagine futures where 
advances in AI contribute to widespread economic 
disruption.24 

 → Depersonalisation: While people generally recognise the 
potential of AI to support decision-making, they express 
concern that it might become a replacement for human 
judgement. Dialogue participants consistently highlight 
a risk that AI could be used to replace human decision-
makers – either through automation or through an over-
reliance on technology – leading to a depersonalisation 
of people’s interactions with private or public sector 
organisations. They warn that, no matter how much 
data it can draw from, AI cannot replace the empathy or 
understanding required to make decisions about people, 
particularly for vulnerable people or in contexts where 
decisions have a significant personal impact.25 

 → Control and autonomy: Connected to these concerns 

about replacement of human judgement are questions 
about how people can maintain their autonomy as AI-
enabled automated decision-making systems are more 
widely adopted.26 

 → Transparency and accountability: Greater transparency 
and information about the development of AI is seen 
as a necessary countermeasure to help avoid a loss of 
individual autonomy in the use of AI. Dialogues show 
that people wish to have choices about whether or 
how they engage with AI, enabled by the provision of 
information, opt outs, or upstream decisions about how 
AI is used.27 

To help avoid these concerns, there is a demand for 
independent regulation that centres public benefit in AI 
development. There is little trust in the private sector to 
work in the public interest;28 governments and independent 
organisations are seen as playing important roles in 
creating the guardrails that can hold technology developers 
to account.29 

Underneath these aspirations and concerns, public 
dialogues suggest a wariness that AI might undermine the 
things that we – as individuals or society – hold dear. For 
example, conversations about autonomous vehicles connect 
to people’s sense of freedom around being ‘on the road’;30 
discussions about data use in digital identity systems relate 

 8

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI to a desire for self-definition;31 and debates about the 
use of AI in art surface the value placed on creativity and 
self-expression as a shared human pursuit.32 Protecting 
– or enhancing – these human experiences is central to 
conversations about the role of AI in society, and the checks-
and-balances required to deliver beneficial outcomes  
from AI. 

In R&D communities, there is growing appreciation for the 
importance of public participation in ensuring AI systems are 
designed to reflect social priorities, helping identify potential 
harms in deployment, and increasing the perceived legitimacy of 
AI-enabled interventions. However, a range of barriers to bringing 
public and civil society voices to AI R&D persist. These include 
the resource intensity of convening dialogues, misalignment 
between the timescales for R&D and public deliberations, and 
the challenges associated with translating insights from dialogue 
into action. For such dialogue to be meaningful, it needs to 
take place early enough in the development pipeline to shape 
AI system design or implementation and in a way that brings 
diverse voices to the table. 

Previous dialogues have delivered valuable insights about the 
desired trajectory for policy and technology development in AI. 
Their impact has been hindered by the absence of a mechanism 
for sustained engagement that connects to AI R&D or the 
development of policy frameworks. Longer-term Citizens 
Assemblies offer a potential route to fill this gap by providing a 
forum for continuing engagement, but need to be supported by 
mechanisms to bridge into the practices of research and policy. 
This type of sustained, meaningful engagement could provide a 
starting point for developing a shared vision for AI in the UK, and 
for articulating priority areas where AI could help create social 
and economic benefit. It could help bridge the gap between 
technological progress and public benefit, by bringing back into 
focus the opportunities for AI to deliver public benefit for the UK. 

 9

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI Creating the conditions for 
effective governance

AI capabilities”.39 This contrasts unfavourably with the 
£100 million committed that year to the AI Safety Institute 
to evaluate the technical performance of a subset of AI 
models.40 

In the context of concerns about the influence of large technology 
companies in AI, public discussions about AI governance have 
increasingly called for independent regulatory oversight. The 
UK’s overarching position on AI regulation has been broadly the 
same since 2021’s National AI Strategy.33 Sectoral regulators are 
expected to develop regulatory frameworks that are appropriate 
for the domains in which they operate, supported by central 
government to ensure overall coherence of the regulatory 
landscape. 2023’s AI Regulation White Paper re-stated this 
position, noting that sectoral regulators should consider five 
principles in developing their response: safety, security and 
robustness; appropriate transparency and explainability; fairness; 
accountability and governance; and contestability and redress.34 

In the intervening period, progress in the development and 
implementation of sectoral regulations has been variable: 

 → In some areas, legislation has provided new powers for 

regulators to prevent harms arising from AI. For example, the 
Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 gave 
the Competition and Markets Authority enhanced powers 
from now on to intervene in strategic markets to protect 
consumer rights and competition; the Online Safety Act 2024 
made companies that deliver a wide range of online services 
responsible for ensuring user safety, with new duties for 
Ofcom to oversee these responses. Upcoming legislation may 
bring further changes to how regulators govern data access 
and use.35  

 → Some regulators have trialled sandboxes to work through 

uncertainties about how existing regulations apply to AI. 
For example, in 2023 the Digital Regulation Cooperation 
Forum36 (DRCF) launched an advisory service for businesses 
to engage with regulators as they create AI-enabled products 
and services.37 

 → Changing technical capabilities have brought new 

regulatory challenges, for example in relation to generative 
AI and Intellectual Property Rights. The policy response to 
this challenge remains in flux. This will be the focus of a 
forthcoming Policy Brief by the Bennett Institute for Public 
Policy, Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy, and 
ai@cam.

Box 2 summarises how 13 of the UK’s regulators are responding 
to the challenge of governing AI. These share two common 
themes: 

Box 2: Insights from regulator responses to the 
2023 AI Regulation White Paper

In 2024, ministers wrote to selected regulators asking for an 
update on their strategic approach to AI.41 By May 2024, 13 
regulators had published responses to this call:42 the Bank 
of England, Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), 
Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA), Health and Safety Executive 
(HSE), Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), Legal 
Services Board (LSB), Medicines and Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency (MHRA), Office for Nuclear Regulation 
(ONR), Office for Standards in Education, Children’s 
Services and Skills (Ofsted), Office of Communications 
(Ofcom), Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem), 
and Office of qualifications and Examinations Regulation 
(Ofqual). 

These responses show the range of ways in which sectoral 
regulators are analysing the impact of AI on their sector 
and taking action to build capacity to respond. They also 
demonstrate the different levels of AI readiness in each 
sector: 

 → Some have already carried out extensive engagement 
with relevant industry stakeholders to understand 
relevant issues and regulatory gaps. For example, in 2021 
the ONR published a report setting out the challenges 
associated with applying apply its safety regulations and 
quality standards to AI. 

 → Others are at an earlier stage in understanding the AI 

landscape in their sector, for example Ofgem is carrying 
out a consultation to inform the development of its 
regulatory approach.

 → Many regulators have issued some form of high-level 
guidance relating to AI, including the LSB, FCA, ICO, 
HSE, EHRC, and CMA.

 → Reflecting the new risks posed by advances in AI, some – 

for example, CMA and Ofcom – have already seen their 
regulatory powers and responsibilities change through 
recent legislation. 

 → To support innovators to develop AI applications, several 
regulators have convened ‘sandbox’-style activities, 
including the MHRA’s AI Airlock, ONR and Environment 
Agency sandbox pilot, FCA AI Lab, and Digital Regulation 
Cooperation Forum (DRCF) sandbox initiative.

 → The need for further work to understand how existing 

 → Less common were examples of enforcement to ensure 

regulations apply to AI, where there may be gaps between 
regulatory bodies, and whether additional powers are needed 
to help fill these gaps. For example, a recent DRCF project 
considered regulatory responses to transparency as a shared 
concern across different sectors.38 

 → The need to respond to a complex, fast-moving technology in 
conditions of constrained resources. In 2023, the previous UK 
Government committed £10 million “to jumpstart regulators’ 

regulation was implemented in practice.

These reports illustrate the challenge regulators face in 
resourcing their responses to AI. For example, the CMA 
points to the range of actions it has taken to recruit expert 
staff to its AI response teams, while the MHRA sets out 
plans to recruit further staff to support its AI workstrands, 
and the EHRC highlights the difficulties it faces in funding 

 10

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI such expansion.

Responses also give many examples of cross-regulator 
collaboration, through forums like the DRCF, working groups 
on issues like cybersecurity, the AI Standards Forum for UK 
Regulators, and Regulator’s Innovation Network. They give 
less insight into the support provided by central government 
for developing regulatory responses, raising questions about 
the role of the proposed central government coordinating 
function. This function may find opportunities to reduce 
duplication of efforts or more rapidly share insights across 
these networks. 

Public dialogues consistently call for democratic oversight 
that ensures AI development aligns with societies’ values and 
needs. Over time, these dialogues suggest growing support for 
regulatory interventions to safeguard against power imbalances 
in AI development or misuses of these technologies. Responding 
to these concerns in the absence of additional investment in the 
regulatory environment will require innovative approaches to 
regulatory capability-building.

A starting point would be a detailed analysis of regulatory 
gaps or overlaps. This analysis is vital in shifting focus from 
high-level principles to practical implementation and directing 
constrained resources to priority areas. It would help increase 
confidence amongst those deploying AI about the regulatory 
implications of their work, and so would help derisk investment. 
Establishing a strong central coordination function could also 
help build regulatory capabilities. For example, understanding 
where sandbox initiatives have been successful could help scale 
access to proving grounds where innovators can work with 
regulators to test the regulatory implications of new products 
or services, while highlighting where action is needed to change 
or strengthen current regulations. Across these areas, progress 
requires collaboration between innovation, regulation, and policy 
communities to build understanding of how current practices 
in AI impinge on regulatory frameworks, what new practices or 
technical capability might create new regulatory challenges, and 
what responses are needed. 

 11

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
Building a public innovation 
infrastructure 

Leveraging investments in compute
Compute has been an important enabler of advances in AI over 
the last ten years.43 Model performance, and in particular Large 
Language Model performance, scales with compute power, 
access to data, and model size, though the relative importance 
of each of those factors varies across different areas of AI 
research and application.44 While there is debate within the 
research community about whether this scaling relationship will 
continue, access to compute will remain an important enabler of 
AI research and development. 

Investment in compute has been a recurring theme in UK AI 
policy:

 → 2018’s AI Sector Deal highlighted the importance of investing 
in the UK’s digital infrastructure, noting a new partnership 
between the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council (EPSRC), the Science and Technology Facilities 
Council (STFC) and the University of Cambridge would deliver 
a £10 million AI supercomputer.

 → 2021’s National AI Strategy commissioned a review of the 
UK’s compute needs to inform further investments.45 

 → 2021’s UK Research and Innovation AI review noted access to 
compute would be an important enabler of AI innovation. 

 → 2022’s Independent Review of the Future of Compute 

called for a strategic vision and roadmap for compute and 
support for researchers and businesses to access to compute 
facilities.46 

 → 2023’s AI Research Resource announcements said that 

Government would invest in a cluster of advanced computers 
for AI research.47 2024 saw further announcements that no 
funding was available for some of the projects anticipated 
under this investment.48 

Excitement about the size of proposed investments in compute 
– and whether those investments will proceed – obscures an 
important conversation about how to deliver public value from 
these investments. Delivering such value requires consideration 
not only of the size of the compute facility being developed, but 
how it works and who it serves. 

A world-leading High Performance Compute (HPC) facility needs 
to provide both compute capabilities and support for its users. 
Those users might include AI researchers, domain researchers 
from across disciplines, businesses, civil society, or public sector 
organisations. Each brings different types of compute need. 
Design factors to consider in developing this ecosystem of 
support include:

Hardware: While GPUs dominate conversations about AI 
hardware, many areas of research benefit from access to 
both CPUs and GPUs for different types of compute jobs.49 
For example, a climate modeller might wish to access CPUs 
to support data processing or cleaning, or to run some initial 
calculations, before using GPUs for large-scale parallel 

computations of atmospheric dynamics; a deep learning 
researcher working on neural network architectures might 
prioritise access to GPUs for faster training of large models. In 
the coming years, trends in hardware development may also put 
the needs of different communities in tension. A shift towards 
lower precision GPUs might benefit AI researchers focused on 
developing large models, as they allow faster computation of 
larger models using less energy. Such researchers might prefer 
increased computational speed at lower precision. However, 
other areas of research could suffer because of reduced 
precision. In climate research, for example, where researchers are 
modelling energy transfer across complex atmospheric, oceanic, 
and land systems, precision matters; this type of research uses 
high-precision calculations to create accurate simulations that 
represent the Earth’s systems across vast spatial and temporal 
scales.50 HPC facilities that need to serve a diverse community 
or research and practice need to maintain both CPU and GPU 
resources that allow different types of compute job, alongside 
software stacks that support both traditional scientific software 
and systems optimised for AI. 

Strategic asset management: Balancing competing HPC 
demands from different user communities requires effective 
workflow management. The needs of large, computationally 
intensive projects may be in tension with those of other projects. 
For many smaller projects – or innovative projects trialling new 
methods – it may be beneficial to quickly try something at 
smaller scale and make changes, before deploying a larger job. 
Many HPC facilities are run to maximise processor utilisation, 
at the expense of queue times, but scheduling policies can be 
designed to enable flexibility and agility. 

Skills: Dedicated resources are needed to provide an on-ramp 
to HPC for new users. Such resources might look different from 
traditional models of HPC support. For HPC managers, this 
means a shift from enabling jobs to run to providing education, 
curation, and other ‘training wheels’ that help new users get 
projects off the ground. Meeting the needs of these diverse user 
communities will require: 

 → Skilled machine learning engineers, who can work with 

research projects to develop and deploy AI systems at scale. 
This will in turn require incentives to train, recruit, and retain 
such talent.

 → Training for users, for example in how to move from running a 

project on their laptop to a larger system. 

 → Peer mentoring between users, sharing the knowledge and 
know-how they have gained through their experiences of 
using HPC. 

Open-source: Open-source software practices in traditional 
computer science have ensured that stakeholders of all 
varieties, from start-ups to individuals to governments and 
large corporations, have access to state-of-the-art software. 
In traditional programs, the source code fully specifies the 
algorithms. This means that access to the source code of an 
operating system or a programming language is sufficient to 
allow others to contribute to or build on these innovations. In 
AI, the situation is more nuanced. Some works have identified 
as many as fourteen51 ways in which AI models can be perceived 

 12

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI as open, with no existing models fulfilling all.52 One particularly 
challenging area is data openness, where issues include a lack 
of standards around openness of data, and tensions around 
intellectual property rights of individual creators, personal data 
rights of citizens, and the data requirements of state-of-the-
art models. Traditionally intellectual property has protected the 
rights of the individual creator.53 As generative AI distils data 
to capture much broader aspects of human culture, there are 
calls for reforms that respect fundamental rights of access to 
the educational value of such models.54 By dominating source 
code, data or compute, large company incumbents are able to 
obstruct disruptive innovations that may better serve the needs 
of citizens.55 

Developing the National Data Library 
Data is the resource that allows AI systems56 to learn how to 
identify patterns, generate predictions, or make decisions. The 
availability of large volumes of high-quality data has been central 
to the development of today’s AI capabilities. For example, 
open resources such as ImageNet57 have provided rich training 
material for deep learning algorithms. More recently, high-
profile AI successes such as AlphaFold have relied on access to 
carefully curated datasets that represent the ‘ground truth’ of 
experimentally determined protein structures,58 alongside protein 
sequence databases,59 to drive advances in understandings of 
protein folding.

Creating a data environment that facilitates safe, secure, 
and trustworthy access to data for AI development is a long-
term policy challenge. Data governance has complex technical, 
organisational, cultural, and economic elements, including 
questions about: 

 → regulatory requirements;
 → ethical concerns;
 → ownership;
 → value of data assets and incentives for data sharing;
 → sovereignty concerns; and
 → security and privacy issues. 

Waves of policy development have sought to unlock wider access 
to data. For example: the FAIR data principles aimed to make 
research data more discoverable, accessible, and reusable;60 
data intermediaries have proposed a new type of organisation 
to overcome coordination issues or power asymmetries across 
stakeholders involved in data sharing;61 and synthetic data was 
proposed as an alternative to access to sensitive datasets.62 
Each of these approaches have added to understandings of what 
works – or does not work – in enabling access to data. None 
provided a silver bullet. 

2020’s National Data Strategy started a conversation about the 
role of government in tackling these interconnected issues. It set 
out a framework for government action to improve the quality 
of data assets, build skills in data use, make data appropriately 
accessible and re-usable, and embed data ethics in research and 
innovation, under the umbrella of “missions” to: 

 → Unlock the value of data across the economy;
 → Secure a pro-growth and trusted data regime;
 → Transform government’s use of data to drive efficiency and 

improve public services;

 → Ensure the security and resilience of the infrastructure on 

which data relies;

 → Champion the international flow of data.63 

Despite a stated intention to collaborate with stakeholders in 
implementation, this Strategy lacked an underpinning action 
plan. A result is that it failed to gain momentum. 

The proposal to create a National Data Library offers an 
opportunity to reinvigorate efforts to increase the accessibility 
and use of strategic data assets. This initiative is expected “to 
bring together existing research programmes and help deliver 
data-driven public services, whilst maintaining strong safeguards 
and ensuring all of the public benefit”.64 

A range of design considerations for the National Data Library 
have already been set out, including: 

 → The ability to provide practical tools, support, and governance 
structures to link diverse public sector datasets and data 
feeds65 and provide a platform to access data assets;66 

 → Provision of support for users to find and access data 

resources;67 

 → Implementation of governance mechanisms that ensure 

trustworthy data management;68 

 → Co-design with stakeholder communities who could benefit 

from the National Data Library, supported by public dialogues 
to identify priority areas for action.69 

 → How to understand the value of different data assets.70 

Success will require action to bridge from these strategic design 
features to the practical barriers that block access to data today. 
These are summarised in Box 3.

Box 3: Practical concerns in data access

Uncertainty about the legal mechanisms to share data for 
public services: 
The UK Digital Economy Act 2017 gives a legal basis for 
Government departments to share and combine datasets 
for the purposes of improving public services, preventing 
fraud, or supporting research. However, research suggests 
that uncertainty amongst officials about the breadth of 
the legal cover provided by the Act for data sharing, and a 
lack of robust, easily implementable, and legally compliant 
data sharing frameworks has led to an underutilisation of 
these powers. Where the Act has been successfully used 
to facilitate data sharing, it has been with the support of 
strong inter-departmental coordination and clear legal 
guidance.71 Forthcoming legislative proposals under the 
Data (Access and Use) Bill could bring further changes in 
policy and practice in this area.

Gaps between legal rights and practical access:  
There are cases where the legal basis for data access might 
be clear, yet a range of practical barriers still hinder its 
use. For example, the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act 1988 permits researchers to make copies of copyright-

 13

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI protected works, including journal articles or books, for 
the purposes of computational analysis, so long as it is for 
non-commercial research. In such circumstances, permission 
from the copyright holder to carry out such analysis is not 
required, provided the researcher can lawfully access the 
material, for example through open access repositories. 
However, in practice, it can be difficult to access such 
material. Publishers might use digital rights management 
technologies to prevent automated scraping, limiting how 
much content researchers can download for the development 
of large AI models. Publishers can also implement restrictive 
licensing provisions or API restrictions that limit access to 
data or require specific licenses or fees to use journal data. 
The result can be lengthy contract negotiations between 
research institutions and scientific publishers to unlock data 
access.72 Even when publishers are willing to make their 
material available, modern content delivery networks (CDNs) 
may limit availability by default.73 A CDN can help websites 
load faster and handle high traffic by serving content from 
a server closer to the user. However, because CDNs act 
as intermediaries between users and websites, they can 
interfere with automated access, even when the website 
owners intend to allow it. This can unintentionally hinder legal 
web-scraping efforts.

Interoperability of data assets:  
The ability to generate new insights from combinations 
of datasets should be a strength of today’s AI systems. 
However, a lack of interoperability in data systems – the 
ability to exchange and integrate data from different sources 
– can impede such analysis. Datasets are often stored in 
different formats by different data holders, or use different 
standards for describing data, which makes merging data 
from diverse sources technically challenging. Alongside 
these issues of technical interoperability, when combining 
datasets from disparate sectors or disciplines there is a need 
to ensure its semantic interoperability – ensuring that the 
information contained in data is understood in the same way. 
For example, in the NHS, hospitals, clinics, and local surgeries 
often store patient data in different formats, creating silos of 
patient data, or use different codes or taxonomies to describe 
the information held in patient data, hindering integration. 
Initiatives like the Local Health and Care Record programme 
have set out to tackle these issues through the creation of a 
common standard technology for health and care.74 

Connecting secure data access to HPC facilities:  
Secure data environments (SDEs) provide a platform 
for accessing, processing, and analysing sensitive data 
resources under controlled conditions. SDEs are designed 
to ensure that only personnel with appropriate permissions 
can access data, that data access is legally compliant, and 
that security measures are in place to prevent release of 
sensitive information. Integrating SDEs with HPC facilities 
can streamline analysis of sensitive data, removing the 
risks of data breaches as different data resources are 
moved between SDEs and other facilities. There are already 
examples of such capabilities in the UK. For example, Health 
Data Research UK provides a secure health data environment 
that links sensitive health data to HPC systems provided by 

Cambridge Services for Data Driven Discovery.75 

Access to skilled data managers:  
There is a growing demand for data professionals who can 
understand the technical and governance aspects of data 
management.76 Without adequate funding for such roles, it is 
difficult for organisations to establish effective data sharing 
practices. Investment in data management teams can help 
create strategic data assets that deliver value for research 
and innovation. For example, UK Biobank has a dedicated 
data management team that ensures the quality, integrity, 
and accessibility of its data resources, through data curation, 
metadata management, and the facilitation of data sharing 
agreements with researchers. The team also provides a user-
friendly data portal that provides an easy point of entry for 
researchers to request access to data.77 

Lack of incentives for private sector data sharing:  
Even when data is not being actively used to generate 
value, many organisations reasonably view their data as 
a competitive asset. This can create a reluctance to share 
data, in case it reveals proprietary information, or reduces 
competitive advantage, as well as possibly contravening 
competition law or other regulations, or creating risks that are 
uninsurable. For example, the importance of understanding 
global supply chains was highlighted during the Covid-19 
pandemic. Firm-level transaction data can provide insights into 
patterns of economic activity that can inform policymaking. 
However, accessing such data is challenging.78 By acting as an 
intermediary with private sector organisations, the National 
Data Library could help unblock such data access agreements. 
There are precedents for third parties intervening to facilitate 
private sector data sharing. The Data Communications 
Network, for example, provides a communications technology 
infrastructure that allows secure data transfers across 
over 100 million smart meter devices, encouraging energy 
companies to share data through financial incentives, clear 
data governance protocols, and a focus on a shared public 
benefit.79 

Delivering high-level policy aspirations to build a public innovation 
infrastructure requires a deep understanding of the practices 
associated with AI innovation. The National Data Library 
provides an opportunity to unblock the practical barriers to 
data access and use experienced by those innovating with 
AI. Investments in HPC present an opportunity to accelerate 
innovation, if they can be built for the needs of those working 
with real-world challenges, including respecting data privacy and 
security, and intellectual property rights.

Policy development and implementation in these areas needs to 
be grounded in an understanding of user need. The next wave 
of policy effort to build our public innovation infrastructure can 
help create this understanding through use cases or pathfinder 
projects that convene diverse stakeholders around the shared 
ambition to tackle a specific problem using AI, that commit to 
working through the practical issues that arise in AI development 
and deployment, and that share lessons from these experiences 
back into the design of the UK’s innovation infrastructure.

 14

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
Growing the domestic base 

Enablers of innovation
Government can draw on a variety of levers to stimulate 
innovation, many of which have already been looked at in the 
context of AI (see Box 4). 

The challenge of growing the domestic AI base is partly one 
of complexity; there is no single point of policy intervention 
that delivers immediate results. Instead, a web of policies 
need to interact to help create an amenable environment for 
AI development. The challenge is also one of specificity. While 
AI policy debates have identified a range of levers to support 
innovation – procurement, tax credits, regulation, for example 
– these answers are often too broad to be operationalisable. 
Efforts to translate those ideas into action suffer from an 
absence of deep understanding of the issues that arise in 
implementing an AI innovation, of what policy interventions 
have been tried before (and with what success), and of how 
government can help overcome these implementation issues.

The public sector as a role model for innovation
Another way in which government can catalyse innovation is 
by showing how to deliver successful AI projects and enabling 
others to follow in its footsteps. The recent reconfiguration 
of the Department for Science, Innovation, and Technology 
has created a digital centre of government with the aim of 
positioning the Department as “standard bearer” for the use of 
technology in public services,96 and driving a technology-enabled 
transformation of people’s interactions with Government.

ai@cam’s public dialogues on AI and the Missions for Government 
suggest the role that AI could play in public services. They also 
demonstrate a scepticism about whether Government can 
translate these aspirations into reality, in a context where public 
sector workers in critical frontline services like health, education, 
and criminal justice are facing growing demand and constrained 
resources. Such high pressure on day-to-day delivery leaves little 
time for the staff that have most detailed understanding of how 
these services work to experiment or innovate. 

There are promising examples of bottom-up initiatives through 
which public sector workers are finding opportunities to use 
AI to improve their work, sharing their understanding of these 
technologies, and supporting others to build their capabilities. 
For example:

 → In local government, South Cambridgeshire District Council 

has set up an AI Club that is open to all staff with an interest 
in using AI to transform Council services.97 

 → In education, the AI in Education initiative has convened 

teacher panels to share ideas and information about how to 
use AI in the classroom.98

The challenge that follows is how to scale these initiatives. 
Without such bottom-up engagement, there is a risk that 
– despite positive intentions – central government imposes 
technology solutions that are not fit for purpose on frontline 
delivery teams. This disconnect between the intention behind an 

Box 4: Policy levers to catalyse wider innovation  
in AI

Procurement: Public sector procurement can be a driver 
for innovation by creating a market or customer base for 
AI companies. With the aim of helping civil servants to 
better understand how to procure AI-enabled products 
and services, Government has produced guidelines for AI 
procurement80 and for the use of generative AI.81 While 
providing a helpful starting point in understanding the 
issues associated with AI procurement, a lack of specific 
implementation mechanisms has proved challenging for 
those seeking to follow these guidelines. Further work is 
needed to translate these principles into practical guidance 
that helps public sector workers to resolve the range of 
questions that arise during the procurement process.82 

Competition: Competition policy plays an important role 
in helping provide a level playing field for new or smaller 
companies, building a diverse and competitive AI ecosystem 
that delivers better results for consumers. 2019’s Furman 
Panel review set out a collection of reforms to the UK’s 
competition framework that could tackle the economic 
challenges associated with market concentration in the 

 15

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI digital sector.83 The creation of the Competition and 
Market Authority’s (CMA) Digital Markets Unit in 2021 and 
subsequent passing of the Digital Markets, Competition and 
Consumers Act 2024 have updated the CMA’s powers of to 
intervene to prevent anticompetitive practices in the tech 
sector, enabling new UK companies to enter the market and 
grow. 

Skills and talent: There are skills gaps across the AI 
development and implementation pipeline, from demands 
for leading AI talent in industry and academia, to the 
upskilling required to help people use AI in the workplace, to 
the need for broad educational initiatives to equip people 
with basic data skills. A range of government initiatives have 
sought to build this skills base, including: 

 → funding and visa schemes to attract AI talent and 

support AI research;84 

 → funding for “AI conversion” courses to increase the 

number of skilled workers in AI roles;85 and

 → postgraduate training schemes.86 

Innovative approaches are needed to scale the impact of 
these interventions, driving a step-change in the number of 
UK residents with AI skills at all levels.

Research funding: The UK’s science and innovation base 
is central to its international competitiveness in AI. 
Maintaining the UK’s global leadership in AI research and 
innovation has been a key part of successive governments’ 
ambitions for AI. Robust research funding is vital to deliver 
these ambitions. The UK’s current capabilities in AI are 
grounded in long-term investment in its innovation base. 
These investments have helped create the vibrant research 
environment and human capital that push the UK towards 
the top of international rankings in AI development. 
They also demonstrate the importance of sustained 
investment to create the conditions for innovation. A series 
of investments from UKRI in recent years has created a 
network of UK AI hubs87 and fellowships for world-leading 
researchers. However, the UK has lagged behind other 
countries in the scale and long-term stability of its research 
funding.89 Despite the strategic importance of these 
investments, they are not leveraged to provide expertise 
and insights to inform policy developments in central 
government. 

Missions: Bringing a focus to AI applications that address 
social needs can drive innovation and help demonstrate the 
value of AI to the public. The Missions for Government could 
provide an umbrella for driving progress in the use of AI to 
tackle major challenges in health, education, energy and 
net zero, and crime and policing. Evidence of ‘what works’ 
in mission-led innovation suggests that successful missions 
require: 

 → Clear, inspiring goals that provide direction and 

motivation to diverse stakeholders. 

 → Cross-sector and interdisciplinary collaboration that 
brings different expertise and skills sets to the table.

 → Flexible funding mechanisms that provide adaptable, 

long-term support for collaborations. 

 → Leadership and team management that drives progress. 
 → Stakeholder engagement with affected communities 

that brings user voices into research.

 → A willingness to take risks, or have projects fail. 
 → Measurable outcomes and mechanisms for evaluation 

based on clear indicators of success and feedback loops 
that connect these to mission design.90 

Delivering beneficial outcomes from the use of AI in the 
Missions for Government will require further work to 
develop translate high-level mission objectives into targeted, 
measurable interventions that can be delivered in practice.

Support for scaling up: The UK has a vibrant AI start up 
scene.91 However, it faces a long-standing policy challenge 
in how to enable small, innovative companies to grow.92 A 
particular area of concern has been the ability of companies 
started in the UK to scale here, instead of being acquired 
by a large overseas company. Scale-ups face a variety 
of challenges, including access to finance, talent, and 
infrastructure.93 A Scale Up Forum, announced in January 
2024, proposed to bring a new focus to challenges faced 
by companies as they grow.94 Recent work by the UK 
Government’s Council for Science and Technology suggests 
how this scale up challenge could be addressed through a 
range of policy interventions.95 

intervention and its real-world impact has been a failure mode 
behind many major IT or digital initiatives. 

The UK has recently seen the impact of such failures in the 
Horizon scandal. When the Post Office’s accounting system 
was computerised by Fujitsu and installed in 1999, it was with 
inadequate technical understanding or operational scrutiny. 
Individual sub postmasters were blamed for errors in the system, 
in some cases with serious and long-lasting personal impacts. 
Factors that contributed to this failure included a central push 
for widespread adoption of a new IT system into an environment 
where many users lacked advanced IT skills; bugs and errors 
in the system; a lack of adequate testing and feedback; and 
variability in local infrastructure. 

Horizon is not the only example of how these implementation 
failures can arise. The Lorenzo scandal, for example, arose in 
connection to the National Programme for IT. This programme 
intended to move the NHS towards the use of electronic health 
records in the early 2000s. It was subsequently abandoned  
and resulted in one of the most expensive contracting bills in  
the history of the public sector.99 Its failure was attributed to  
“lack of adequate end user engagement, the absence of a phased 
change management approach, and underestimation of the scale 

 16

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
of the project”.100 

These failures share certain characteristics:

 → Insufficient consideration of local needs, capabilities, or 

constraints, and insufficient engagement with end-users in 
system design.

 → Lack of effective feedback mechanisms from users to 

leadership. 

 → Rigid, top-down approaches to implementation that did not 

allow for local adaptation. 

Since these projects, practices in software development and 
implementation have shifted away from monolithic software 
systems towards so-called ‘software as a service’. This change 
results in an “intellectual debt”,101 created by the complexity of 
having multiple AI-enabled subcomponents in a decision-making 
system. Engineers and users might have insights into whether 
a system works without understanding why it works, making it 
more challenging to identify potential failure modes or respond 
to them when they occur. 

These insights from previous IT project failures point to the 
importance of developing AI-enabled tools for public services 
in collaboration with users on the front line of delivering those 
services. They demonstrate the importance of stakeholder 
engagement at all stages of design and roll-out, of flexibility in 
implementation and iterative feedback from users, of ensuring 
technical competence at both policy and implementation levels, 
and of engaging independent, technically competent oversight to 
support implementation. 

 17

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
Conclusion

The fundamentals of AI policy have been largely consistent since policymakers first 
became interested in this field, spanning investment in research, access to data, skills 
and talent, support for business, and governance and regulation. This paper is being 
published at a time where the UK’s policy priorities across these areas are in flux. Future 
pathways for policy development could include a new drive behind the use of AI in 
public services, investments in infrastructure, or a focus on economic growth. Along any 
of these pathways, how policy is developed and implemented matters. Engaging the 
UK’s communities of AI research and practice can help policymakers connect macro-
level policy decisions to practical implementation, then to feed the understanding of AI 
innovation created at that ‘micro’ level back into policy design. 

Research and talent are strengths of the UK’s AI community. These strengths can be 
deployed to build AI-enabled solutions to the problems that affect people’s health, 
wealth, and wellbeing, and to develop the governance mechanisms needed to deliver 
safe and effective AI innovations. Evidence from public dialogues about data and AI 
provides a starting point for showing what people want from these technologies. They 
also show the checks-and-balances needed to ensure that AI works for people and 
society. 

By recentring discussions about AI technology and policy around social needs –the 
demand side of the innovation economy – the UK can unlock a new wave of innovation 
that serves the public good. Discussions surrounding AI too often focus on “supply”; on 
creating new technologies without attention to the “demand” signals that relate to 
real-world needs or challenges. The next wave of technology and policy development in 
AI needs to bridge the gap between AI’s technical capabilities and their use to deliver 
real-world public benefit. Articulating areas of need, bringing resources to bear on 
addressing them, and feeding the lessons learned back into the generation of new 
knowledge can help overcome this gap. If successful in building these connections 
between policy and practice, the UK can create an AI ecosystem that is world-leading in 
its innovation and positive social impact. 

The UK’s research institutions can help respond to these challenges by working on 
the challenges in health, social care, education, environment, and more, that people 
highlight as priorities for AI intervention. Research institutions cannot fix this problem 
alone, but can provide the place for bridging public and private concerns. Focusing on 
the practical barriers to implementing AI in areas of public interest or concern – and 
supporting those on the frontlines of such innovation to overcome these barriers 
– can generate a productivity flywheel that closes the gap between technological 
progress and real-world benefit. By building a community around these issues – in 
research, policy, and practice – we can translate these advances into a virtuous circle 
of engagement that scales access to expertise and insights in how to make AI work for 
science and society.

 18

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
AnnexesThis briefing reflects a series of workshops convened by ai@
cam in autumn 2024, on topics ranging from the Missions for 
Government to AI in local government, to national AI strategy, 
to HPC facility design. Thank you to everyone that contributed  
to these engagements.

About ai@cam

ai@cam is the University of Cambridge’s mission to develop AI 
that serves science, citizens, and society. It is an interdisciplinary 
AI incubator that is accelerating research to tackle real-world 
challenges with AI, informing the development of AI policy, and 
connecting across business and civil society to help translate AI 
innovations to practice. Its vision is of AI-enabled innovations 
that benefit society, created through interdisciplinary research 
that is deeply connected to real-world needs. 

More information: ai.cam.ac.uk

About the Bennett Institute for Public 
Policy

The Bennett Institute for Public Policy is one of the UK’s leading 
public policy institutes, achieving significant impact through 
its high-quality research. Our goal is to rethink public policy in 
an era of turbulence and inequality. Our research connects the 
world-leading work in technology and science at the University 
of Cambridge with the economic and political dimensions of 
policymaking. We are committed to outstanding teaching,  
policy engagement, and to devising sustainable and  
long-lasting solutions. 

More information: www.bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk

About the Minderoo Centre for 
Technology and Democracy

The Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy is an 
independent team of academic researchers at the University of 
Cambridge, who are radically rethinking the power relationships 
between digital technologies, society and our planet. 

More information: www.mctd.ac.uk

 20

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI  
 
Endnotes

1.    Hall, W. and Pesenti, J. (2017) Growing the Artificial Intel-
ligence industry in the UK, available at: https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/growing-the-artificial-intelli-
gence-industry-in-the-uk [accessed 22 October 2024]

2.    Dutton, T., Barron, B. and Boskovic, G. (2018) Building an 

AI world: Report on national and regional AI strategies, 
available at: https://cifar.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/
buildinganaiworld_eng.pdf [accessed 22 October 2024]

3.    UK Government (2018) AI Sector Deal, available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelli-
gence-sector-deal/ai-sector-deal [accessed 22 October 
2024]

technologyreview.com/2021/07/30/1030329/machine-learn-
ing-ai-failed-covid-hospital-diagnosis-pandemic/ [accessed 
22 October 2024]

14.  UK Government (2024) Artificial Intelligence (AI) Opportu-
nities Action Plan: terms of reference, available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelli-
gence-ai-opportunities-action-plan-terms-of-reference/arti-
ficial-intelligence-ai-opportunities-action-plan-terms-of-ref-
erence [accessed 22 October 2024]

15.  Tortoise Media (2024) Global AI Index, available at: https://
www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/#rankings 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

4.    UK Government (2021) National AI Strategy, available 

16.  Discussions were designed to align with the Missions 

at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nation-
al-ai-strategy [accessed 22 October 2024]

for Government. See: https://labour.org.uk/change/mis-
sion-driven-government/ 

5.  

6.   

 UK Government (2023) A pro-innovation approach to AI 
regulation, available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/ai-regulation-a-pro-innovation-approach/
white-paper [accessed 22 October 2024]

Including the Data Protection Act (2018) giving force to the 
GDPR: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/12/con-
tents; The Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 
(2024), giving new powers to the Competition and Markets 
Authority https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2024/13/
contents; and the Online Safety Act (2023) setting out new 
duties for OFCOM in relation to online communications 
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/50/contents 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

7.    UK AI Safety Institute: https://www.aisi.gov.uk [accessed 22 

October 2024]

8.    See: Data (Use and Access) Bill factsheets, available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/data-use-
and-access-bill-factsheets [accessed 24 October 2024]

9.    For example: Goldman Sachs (2024) Will the $1 trillion of 

generative AI investment pay off?, available at: https://www.
goldmansachs.com/insights/articles/will-the-1-trillion-of-
generative-ai-investment-pay-off [accessed 22 October 
2024

10.  Paleyes, A., Urma, R.G. and Lawrence, N. D. (2022) Challeng-
es in Deploying Machine Learning: A Survey of Case Studies. 
ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 6, Article 114 (June 2023), 29 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3533378 

11.  Denford, J.J., Dawson, G.S. and Desouza, K.C. (2023) A clus-

ter analysis of national AI stragegies, available at: https://
www.brookings.edu/articles/a-cluster-analysis-of-nation-
al-ai-strategies/#the-focus-of-our-cluster-analysis-373 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

12. 

13. 

 UN AI Advisory Body (2024) Governing AI for humanity, 
available at: https://www.un.org/en/ai-advisory-body [ac-
cessed 22 October 2024]

 An example of this failure can be seen in the use of AI 
during Covid-19 response. For example: Heaven, W.D. (2021) 
Hundreds of AI tools have been built to catch covid. None 
of them helped. MIT Tech Review, available at: https://www.

17.  For an example of an alternative lens to view international 

relations in AI, see: Turobov, A., Coyle, D. and Harding, V. 
(2024) Moving beyond competition: domain-specific ap-
proach for international AI framework, Bennett Institute 
for Public Policy, available at: https://www.bennettinstitute.
cam.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/AIXGEO-Mov-
ing-beyond-competition.pdf [accessed 1 December 2024]

18.  Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards machine 

learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/
projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
RSA (2018) Application of automated decision-making sys-
tems, available at: https://www.thersa.org/action-and-re-
search/rsa-projects/economy-enterprise-manufactur-
ing-folder/forum-for-ethical-AI [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
Ipsos MORI (2023) Public Attitudes to AI, available at: 
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/publication/
documents/2023-11/Public%20Perceptions%20of%20
AI%20charts.pdf [accessed 22 October 2024]; Geospatial 
Commission (2021) Public dialogue on location data ethics, 
available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pub-
lic-dialogue-on-location-data-ethics-published [accessed 
22 October 2024]; Ada Lovelace Institute (2023) How do 
people feel about AI? Ada Lovelace Institute, available at: 
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/public-atti-
tudes-ai/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; DSIT (2023) The tide 
is changing: Monitoring public attitudes towards data and 
AI (December 2023), available at: https://rtau.blog.gov.
uk/2023/12/06/the-tide-is-changing-monitoring-public-at-
titudes-towards-data-and-ai/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
DSIT (2024) Public attitudes to data and AI: Tracker survey 
(Wave 3) available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-sur-
vey-wave-3/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-
wave-3#:~:text=7.1%20Summary,healthcare%2C%20polic-
ing%2C%20and%20education.[accessed 22 October 2024]

19.  Department for Transport (2018) Attitudes to emerg-

ing technologies, including automated vehicles, available 
at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/721722/
future-roads-public-dialogue-exploring-the-publics-reac-
tions-to-future-road-technologies.pdf [accessed 22 October 
2024]; ai@cam and Hopkins van Mil (2024) AI and the Mis-

 22

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI sions for Government: insights from public dialogue, availa-
ble at ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 October 2024]

20.  Milltown Partners and Clifford Chance (2023) Responsible 
AI in Practice: Public Expectations of Approaches to Devel-
oping and Deploying AI, available at: https://www.clifford-
chance.com/content/dam/cliffordchance/hub/TechGroup/
responsible-ai-in-practice-report-2023.pdf [accessed 22 
October 2024]; ai@cam and Hopkins van Mil (2024) AI and 
the Missions for Government: insights from public dialogue, 
available at ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 October 2024]

21.  DSIT (2024) Public attitudes to data and AI: Tracker survey 
(Wave 3) available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-sur-
vey-wave-3/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-
wave-3#:~:text=7.1%20Summary,healthcare%2C%20polic-
ing%2C%20and%20education.[accessed 22 October 2024]

22.  Drawing from: Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards 

machine learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/top-
ics 
-policy/projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 
2024];  
ONS (2023) Public awareness, opinions and expectations 
about artificial intelligence: July to October 2023, available 
at: htt-ps://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/
itandinternetindustry/articles/publicawarenessopinionsan-
dexpectationsaboutartificialin-telligence/julytooctober2023 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; Ada Lovelace Institute (2023) 
How do people feel about AI? Ada Lovelace Institute, avail-
able at: https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/pub-
lic-attitudes-ai/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; DSIT (2024) 
Public attitudes to data and AI: Tracker survey (Wave 3) 
available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-wave-3/
public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-wave-3#:~:-
text=7.1%20Summary,healthcare%2C%20policing%2C%20
and%20education.[accessed 22 October 2024] 

23.  Drawing from Geospatial Commission (2021) Public dia-
logue on location data ethics, available at: https://www.
gov.uk/government/news/public-dialogue-on-location-da-
ta-ethics-published [accessed 22 October 2024]; ONS (2023) 
Public awareness, opinions and expectations about artificial 
intelligence: July to October 2023, available at: https://www.
ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/itandinternetindustry/
articles/publicawarenessopinionsandexpectationsaboutar-
tificialinte-lligence/julytooctober2023 [accessed 22 October 
2024]; DSIT (2024) Public attitudes to data and AI: Tracker 
survey (Wave 3) available at: https://www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/publications/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-
survey-wave-3/public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-sur-
vey-wave-3#:~:text=7.1%20Summary,healthcare%2C%20
policing%2C%20and%20education.[accessed 22 October 
2024]; DSIT (2024) Public dialogue on trust in digital identity 
services: a findings report, available at: https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/public-dialogue-on-trust-in-dig-
ital-identity-services/public-dialogue-on-trust-in-digi-
tal-identity-services-a-findings-report [accessed 22 October 
2024]

24.  Drawing from Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards 

machine learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/top-
ics-policy/projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 
2024]; Public First (2023) What does the public think about 
AI? Available at: https://publicfirst.co.uk/ai/ [accessed 22 
October 2024]; DSIT (2023) The tide is changing: Moni-
toring public attitudes towards data and AI (December 
2023), available at: https://rtau.blog.gov.uk/2023/12/06/
the-tide-is-changing-monitoring-public-attitudes-towards-
data-and-ai/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; DSIT (2024) 
Public attitudes to data and AI: Tracker survey (Wave 3) 
available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-wave-3/
public-attitudes-to-data-and-ai-tracker-survey-wave-3#:~:-
text=7.1%20Summary,healthcare%2C%20policing%2C%20
and%20education.[accessed 22 October 2024]

25.  Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards machine 

learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/
projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
RSA (2018) Application of automated decision-making sys-
tems, available at: https://www.thersa.org/action-and-re-
search/rsa-projects/economy-enterprise-manufactur-
ing-folder/forum-for-ethical-AI [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
Ada Lovelace Institute (2023) How do people feel about AI? 
Ada Lovelace Institute, available at: https://www.adalove-
laceinstitute.org/report/public-attitudes-ai/ [accessed 22 
October 2024]; ai@cam and Hopkins van Mil (2024) AI and 
the Missions for Government: insights from public dialogue, 
available at ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 October 2024]

26.  Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards machine 

learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/
projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
ai@cam and Hopkins van Mil (2024) AI and the Missions 
for Government: insights from public dialogue, available at 
ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 October 2024]

27.  Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards machine 

learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/
projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
RSA (2018) Application of automated decision-making sys-
tems, available at: https://www.thersa.org/action-and-re-
search/rsa-projects/economy-enterprise-manufactur-
ing-folder/forum-for-ethical-AI [accessed 22 October 2024]; 
Geospatial Commission (2021) Public dialogue on location 
data ethics, available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/public-dialogue-on-location-data-ethics-published 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; Ada Lovelace Institute (2021) 
The Citizens’ Biometrics Council, available at: https://www.
adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/citizens-biometrics-council/ 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; DSIT (2024) Public dialogue on 
trust in digital identity services: a findings report, available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-di-
alogue-on-trust-in-digital-identity-services/public-dia-
logue-on-trust-in-digital-identity-services-a-findings-report 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; Connected by Data (2023) 
Involving the public in AI policymaking - Experiences from 
the People’s Panel on AI, available at: https://connectedby-
data.org/projects/2023-peoples-panel-on-ai [accessed 22 
October 2024]

28. 

 Milltown Partners and Clifford Chance (2023) Responsible 

 23

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI AI in Practice: Public Expectations of Approaches to Devel-
oping and Deploying AI, available at: https://www.clifford-
chance.com/content/dam/cliffordchance/hub/TechGroup/
responsible-ai-in-practice-report-2023.pdf [accessed 22 
October 2024]

29.  Ada Lovelace Institute (2021) The Citizens’ Biometrics 

Council, available at: https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/
report/citizens-biometrics-council/ [accessed 22 October 
2024]; Ada Lovelace Institute (2023) How do people feel 
about AI? Ada Lovelace Institute, available at: https://
www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/public-attitudes-ai/ 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; Ipsos MORI (2023) Public 
Attitudes to AI, available at: https://www.ipsos.com/sites/
default/files/ct/publication/documents/2023-11/Public%20
Perceptions%20of%20AI%20charts.pdf [accessed 22 Oc-
tober 2024]; Milltown Partners and Clifford Chance (2023) 
Responsible AI in Practice: Public Expectations of Approach-
es to Developing and Deploying AI, available at: https://
www.cliffordchance.com/content/dam/cliffordchance/
hub/TechGroup/responsible-ai-in-practice-report-2023.pdf 
[accessed 22 October 2024]; Public First (2023) What does 
the public think about AI? Available at: https://publicfirst.
co.uk/ai/ [accessed 22 October 2024]; ai@cam and Hopkins 
van Mil (2024) AI and the Missions for Government: insights 
from public dialogue, available at ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 
October 2024] 

30.  Department for Transport (2018) Attitudes to emerg-

ing technologies, including automated vehicles, available 
at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/721722/
future-roads-public-dialogue-exploring-the-publics-reac-
tions-to-future-road-technologies.pdf [accessed 22 October 
2024]

31.  DSIT (2024) Public dialogue on trust in digital identity ser-
vices: a findings report, available at: https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/public-dialogue-on-trust-in-dig-
ital-identity-services/public-dialogue-on-trust-in-digi-
tal-identity-services-a-findings-report [accessed 22 October 
2024]

32.  For a discussion about the role of AI in art and poetry, see: 
Royal Society (2017) Public attitudes towards machine 
learning, available at: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/
projects/machine-learning/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

33.  UK Government (2021) National AI Strategy, available 

at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nation-
al-ai-strategy [accessed 22 October 2024]

34.  As set out in the AI Regulation White Paper subsequently in 
2023: UK Government (2023) A pro-innovation approach to 
AI regulation, available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/ai-regulation-a-pro-innovation-approach/
white-paper [accessed 22 October 2024]

35.  For example, the Data (Use and Access) Bill, introduced to 

Parliament on 23 October 2024.

36.  Made up of the Information Commissioner’s Office, Ofcom, 

the Competition and Markets Authority, and the Financial 

Conduct Authority

37.  DSIT (2023) New advisory service to help businesses launch 
AI and digital innovations, available at: https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/new-advisory-service-to-help-business-
es-launch-ai-and-digital-innovations [accessed 22 October 
2024]

38.  DRCF (2024) AI Transparency: DRCF Perspectives, available 
at: https://www.drcf.org.uk/publications/blogs/ai-transpar-
ency-drcf-perspectives/ [22 October 2024]

39.  Regulators’ strategic approaches to AI, published at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/regulators-strate-
gic-approaches-to-ai/regulators-strategic-approaches-to-ai 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

40.  UK Government (2023) Introducing the AI Safety Institute, 
available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/
65438d159e05fd0014be7bd9/introducing-ai-safety-insti-
tute-web-accessible.pdf [accessed 22 October 2024]

41.  Request for regulators to publish an update on their stra-
tegic approach to AI: Secretary of State letters, available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/request-
for-regulators-to-publish-an-update-on-their-strategic-
approach-to-ai-secretary-of-state-letters [accessed 22 
October 2024]

42.  Regulators’ strategic approaches to AI, published at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/regulators-strate-
gic-approaches-to-ai/regulators-strategic-approaches-to-ai 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

43.  OpenAI (2021) AI and compute, available at: https://openai.

com/index/ai-and-compute/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

44.  Kaplan, J. et al. (2020) Scaling laws for neural language 

models, available at: https://openai.com/index/scaling-laws-
for-neural-language-models/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

45.  UK Government (2021) National AI Strategy, available 

at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nation-
al-ai-strategy [accessed 22 October 2024]

46.  DSIT (2023) Independent Review of The Future of Compute: 
Final report and recommendations, available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/future-of-com-
pute-review/the-future-of-compute-report-of-the-review-
of-independent-panel-of-experts#list-of-recommendations 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

47.  DSIT (2023) Technology Secretary announces invest-

ment boost making British AI supercomputing 30 
times more powerful, available at: https://www.gov.
uk/government/news/technology-secretary-announc-
es-investment-boost-making-british-ai-supercomput-
ing-30-times-more-powerful [accessed 22 October 2024]

48.  TechRadar (2024) UK government cancels £1bn AI invest-
ment plan, available at: https://www.techradar.com/pro/
uk-government-cancels-pound1bn-ai-investment-plan [ac-
cessed 22 October 2024]

49. 

In general, Central Processing Units (CPUs) are used for 
general-purpose computing and sequential processing, 

 24

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI relevant to tasks like data cleaning, statistical analysis, 
simulation, or running of some scientific software. Graphics 
Processing Units (GPUs) are more useful for matrix opera-
tions or parallel processing.

50.  Düben, P. D., and T. N. Palmer, 2014: Benchmark Tests 

for Numerical Weather Forecasts on Inexact Hardware. 
Mon. Wea. Rev., 142, 3809–3829, https://doi.org/10.1175/
MWR-D-14-00110.1.

51.  Liesenfeld, A. and Dingemanse, M. (2024) Rethinking open 
source generative AI: open-washing and the EU AI Act. 
In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ‘24). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1774–1787. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3630106.3659005

52.  For a discussion about emerging definitions of open source, 
see: Mozilla (2024) Celebrating an important step forward 
for open source AI, available at: https://blog.mozilla.org/en/
mozilla/ai/open-source-ai-definition/ [accessed 1 December 
2024]

53.  Though variations in text and data mining legislation stip-

ulate different duties around aggregated data sets. For 
example, in the US, which is the largest jurisdiction for model 
training, notions such as fair use are still contested.

54.  Delacroix, S. (2024) Sustainable Data Rivers? Rebalancing 

the Data Ecosystem That Underlies Generative AI. Critical AI 
1 April 2024; 2 (1): No Pagination Specified. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1215/2834703X-11205224

55.  ai@cam and Hopkins van Mil (2024) AI and the Missions 

for Government: insights from public dialogue, available at 
ai.cam.ac.uk [accessed 28 October 2024]

56.  AI systems that are based on machine learning, which is 
the method underpinning many of the current AI tools in 
deployment.

57.  Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., & Fei-Fei, L. 
(2009). Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image data-
base. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-
tern recognition (pp. 248–255). https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/5206848 [accessed 22 October 2024]

58.  Such as the Protein Data Bank https://www.rcsb.org 

59.  Detailed further in Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A. et al. 

Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. 
Nature 596, 583–589 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03819-2

60.  Available at: https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/ [ac-

cessed 22 October 2024]

61.  Ada Lovelace Institute (2021) Legal Mechanisms for Data 
Stewardship, available at: https://www.adalovelacein-
stitute.org/report/legal-mechanisms-data-steward-
ship/#:~:text=The%20three%20legal%20mechanisms%20
discussed,in%20the%20data%2Dgovernance%20toolbox 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

62.  Alan Turing Institute and Royal Society (2024) Synthetic 

data – what, why and how? Available at: https://royalsocie-
ty.org/-/media/policy/projects/privacy-enhancing-technol-

ogies/Synthetic_Data_Survey-24.pdf [accessed 22 October 
2024]

63.  DCMS (2020) National Data Strategy, available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-national-da-
ta-strategy/national-data-strategy [accessed 22 October 
2024]

64.  Party Manifesto (2024), available at: https://labour.org.

uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/Labour-Party-manifes-
to-2024.pdf#page=35 ‘accessed 22 October 2024] 

65.  ADR UK (2024) The new UK Government wants a Na-

tional Data Library: a brilliant aspiration, if built on sol-
id foundations, available at: https://www.adruk.org/
news-publications/news-blogs/the-new-uk-government-
wants-a-national-data-library-a-brilliant-aspiration-if-built-
on-solid-foundations/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

66.  Onward (2024) Let’s get real about Britain’s AI status, avail-
able at: https://sciencesuperpower.substack.com/p/lets-get-
real-about-britains-ai-status [accessed 22 October 2024]

67.  Freeguard, G. (2024), How should we think about a National 
Data Library? Available at: https://gavin-freeguard.medium.
com/how-should-we-think-about-a-national-data-library-
dd2d47edee8b [accessed 22 October 2024]

68.  ODI (2024) The ODI’s input to the AI Action Plan: an AI-

ready National Data Library, available at: https://theodi.org/
news-and-events/consultation-responses/the-odis-input-
to-the-ai-action-plan-an-ai-ready-national-data-library/ 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

69.  ai@cam (2024) Access to data for research: lessons for the 
National Data Library from the front lines of AI innovation, 
available at: https://ai.cam.ac.uk/projects/access-to-data-
case-studies [accessed 1 December 2024]

70.  For reports and briefings on this topic, see: https://www.

bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk/research/research-projects/val-
uing-data/ [accessed 1 December 2024]

71.  DCMS and Kantar (2020) Motivations for and barriers to 

data sharing, available at: https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/895505/_Kantar_research_publication.pdf and 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/digital-econo-
my-act-2017-part-5-codes-of-practice/mid-point-report-on-
use-of-the-dea-powers#next-steps [accessed 22 October 
2024]

72.  These issues are explored in a case study on access to data 
for climate research in ai@cam’s policy brief on researcher 
access to data, available at: https://ai.cam.ac.uk/projects/
access-to-data-case-studies [accessed 1 December 2024]

73.  A content delivery network (CDN) is a system of distribut-
ed servers that deliver web content to users based on their 
geographic location. It’s like having multiple copies of a book 
in libraries across the country, rather than just one central 
library.

74.  For example, in Greater Manchester, this programme has 
been taking action to create a joined up health and social 
care patient record system. For information available at: 

 25

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI https://healthinnovationmanchester.com/partnerships/
greater-manchester-doing-digital-differently/local-health-
and-care-records-in-gm/ 

thousands-more-to-train-in-future-tech-like-ai-as-govern-
ment-unveils-over-11-billion-package-to-skill-up-uk [ac-
cessed 22 October 2024]

75.  For example: https://www.hdruk.ac.uk/news/health-data-
research-uk-partners-with-state-of-the-art-supercomput-
ing-service-to-support-national-research-to-understand-
the-causes-of-disease/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

87.  UKRI (2024) £100m boost in AI research will propel trans-
formative innovations, available at: https://www.ukri.org/
news/100m-boost-in-ai-research-will-propel-transforma-
tive-innovations/ [accessed 22 October 2024]

76.  DCMS (2021) Quantifying the UK’s data skills gap, avail-

able at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
quantifying-the-uk-data-skills-gap/quantifying-the-uk-da-
ta-skills-gap-full-report#ministerial-foreword [accessed 22 
October 2024] 

77.  For example: https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/enable-your-re-
search/apply-for-access [accessed 22 October 2024] 

78.  Anton Pichler et al. (2023) Building an alliance to map global 
supply networks.Science382,270-272.DOI:10.1126/science.
adi7521

79.  For example: https://www.smartdcc.co.uk/about-dcc/ [ac-

cessed 22 October 2024]

80.  Guidelines for AI procurement, available at: https://www.

gov.uk/government/publications/guidelines-for-ai-procure-
ment [accessed 22 October 2024]

81.  Generative AI framework for HMG, available at: https://

www.gov.uk/government/publications/generative-ai-frame-
work-for-hmg/generative-ai-framework-for-hmg-html 
[accessed 22 October 2024]

82.  For example, initiatives like the GovTech Catalyst sought 
to provide a forum for working through issues associated 
with public sector procurement of digital technologies. 
Further information available at: https://gds.blog.gov.
uk/2020/06/18/what-we-learnt-from-the-first-phase-of-
the-govtech-catalyst/ [22 October 2024]

83.  Furman Review (2019) Unlocking digital competition, 

available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
unlocking-digital-competition-report-of-the-digital-compet-
ition-expert-panel [22 October 2024]

84.  For example: Turing AI World-Leading Research-

er Fellowships: https://www.ukri.org/opportu-
nity/turing-ai-world-leading-researcher-fellow-
ships-round-three/#:~:text=Through%20the%20Turing%20
AI%20World,currently%20located%20in%20the%20
UK. and AI Futures grants: https://www.great.gov.uk/
campaign-site/ai-futures/#:~:text=AI%20Futures%20
Grants%20helps%20the,surcharge%20and%20trav-
el%2Fsubsistence%20expenses. [accessed 22 October 2024]

85.  DCMS (2020) 2,500 new places on artificial intelligence and 
data science conversion courses now open to applicants, 
available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/2500-
new-places-on-artificial-intelligence-and-data-science-
conversion-courses-now-open-to-applicants [accessed 22 
October 2024]

88.  For information about Turing AI Fellows, see: https://www.
turing.ac.uk/people/fellows/turing-ai-fellows [accessed 22 
October 2024]

89.  Digital Science (2024) Research on Artificial Intelligence – 

the global divides, available at: https://www.digital-science.
com/tldr/article/research-on-artificial-intelligence-the-glob-
al-divides/ [22 October 2024]

90.  For example, work by the OECD: https://oecd-opsi.org/

work-areas/mission-oriented-innovation/ and Mazzucato, 
M. (2018) ‘Mission Oriented Innovation Policy: Challenges 
and Opportunities’, Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), 
pp. 803–815, available at: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/
public-purpose/publications/2017/sep/mission-oriented-in-
novation-policy-challenges-and-opportunities [accessed 22 
October 2024]

91.  Mandys, F. and Coyle, D. (2024) Competitiveness, produc-

tivity and innovation in the UK’s computing sector, Ben-
nett Institute for Public Policy, available at: https://www.
bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/
Competitiveness-productivity-innovation-in-the-UK-com-
puting-sector.pdf [accessed 22 October 2024]

92.  For example, see this discussion on “bridging the valley 

of death” from 2013: Science and Technology Committee 
(2013), Bridging the Valley of Death, Committee’s Eighth 
Report of Session 2012–13, available at: https://committees.
parliament.uk/work/4548/bridging-the-valley-of-death-im-
proving-the-commercialisation-of-research/news/ [accessed 
22 October 2024]

93.  techUK (2024) techUK creates new Scale-up Group to 

support the UK Government’s Scale-up Sprint initiative, 
available at: https://www.techuk.org/resource/techuk-cre-
ates-new-scale-up-group-to-support-the-uk-government-s-
scale-up-sprint-initiative.html [accessed 22 October 2024]

94.  DSIT (2024) Science, Innovation and Technology Secre-

tary Michelle Donelan’s speech at Plexal, available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/science-in-
novation-and-technology-secretary-michelle-done-
lans-speech-at-plexal [acccesed 22 October 2024]

95.  Council for Science and Technology (2024) Driving econom-

ic growth by unlocking investment at scale for innovative 
science and technology companies https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/media/67473ceccf0d45234dd8d0d2/CST_let-
ter_on_scale_up_finance_-_October_2024.pdf [accessed 29 
November 2024]

96.  DSIT (2024) DSIT bolstered to better serve the British 

86.  DSIT (2024), Thousands more to train in future tech like AI 

as government unveils over £1.1 billion package to skill-up 
UK, available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/

public through science and technology, available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/news/dsit-bolstered-to-bet-
ter-serve-the-british-public-through-science-and-tech-

 26

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI nology#:~:text=The%20Department%20for%20Sci-
ence%2C%20Innovation,digital%20transformation%20
of%20public%20services [accessed 22 October 2024]

97. 

 South Cambridgeshire District Council: Our Productivity 
Plan, available at: https://www.scambs.gov.uk/your-coun-
cil-and-democracy/our-business-plan-and-performance/
our-productivity-plan [accessed 22 October 2024]

98. 

 For further information, see: https://www.ai-in-education.
co.uk 

99.  BBC News (2013) NHS IT system one of ‘worst fiascos ever’, 
say MPs, available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-poli-
tics-24130684 [accessed 22 October 2024]

100. Justinia T. (2017) The UK’s National Programme for IT: Why 
was it dismantled? Health Serv Manage Res. Feb;30(1):2-9. 
doi: 10.1177/0951484816662492. Epub 2016 Nov 16. PMID: 
28166675.

101.  Zittrain, J. (2022) ‘Intellectual Debt: With Great Power 

Comes Great Ignorance’, in S. Voeneky et al. (eds.) The Cam-
bridge Handbook of Responsible Artificial Intelligence: Inter-
disciplinary Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press (Cambridge Law Handbooks), pp. 176–184.

 27

Policy brief: Refreshing the UK’s strategic approach to AI For questions about this report, get in touch via  the information below:Email:contact@ai.cam.ac.ukVisit:ai.cam.ac.uk Connect on X:@ai_cam_mission LinkedIn:@ai-cambridge Connect on Bluesky: @ai.cam.ac.ukIn partnership with:ai.cam.ac.uk