Annual

Report

2023 
–24

02
002

048
002

M
M
A
A
C
C
@
@
A
A
•
•

I
I

4
4
2
2
0
0
2
2

T
T
R
R
O
O
P
P
E
E
R
R
L
L
A
A
U
U
N
N
N
N
A
A

Contents

/01
Summary
Page 04 - 09

/02
Introduction

Page 10 - 15

/03
Progress against 
strategic objectives

Page 16 - 29

/05
2024-25 planning
Page 36 - 43

/04
Looking Ahead

Page 30 - 35

/06
Annex 1: Steering group 
membership

Page 44 - 47

1

I

S
T
N
N
O
E
T
T
N
C
O
E
C
S

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04

048

M
A
C
@
A
•

I

4
2
0
2

T
R
O
P
E
R
L
A
U
N
N
A

1

I

N
O
T
C
E
S

Section1
Summary

START

0 1

“

ai@cam is the 
University of 
Cambridge’s mission to 
create AI innovations 
that serve science, 
citizens, and society.

FINISH

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048 
 
 
 
06

AI innovations that serve  
science, citizens, and society.

2022’s ai@cam review identified five core functions needed 
to  deliver  Cambridge’s  vision  of  AI  that  serves  science, 
citizens,  and  society:  a  dynamic  research  community; 
partnerships that centre societal needs; spaces that help 
projects to spin up and respond to areas of need; wider 
access to AI knowledge and skills; and connections to local, 
national, and international priorities for AI. These areas of 
need have been central to ai@cam’s first year of activities:

 → Our AI-deas initiative launched five ambitious 
research programmes that bring together 
researchers from 19 Departments across all 6 
Schools using AI to to tackle critical challenges in 
mental health, fertility, public services, language 
equity, and nature and climate. 

 → Our Policy Lab has catalysed collaborations across 
five University research centres, connecting the 
University’s expertise in AI, policy, and public 
dialogue to the challenges faced by policymakers 
locally, in Westminster and Whitehall, and 
internationally. 

 → Responding to an opportunity presented by 
Research Computing Services’s new High 
Performance Computing (HPC) system, our HPC 
Pioneer Project scheme has helped 46 research 
projects from 20 Departments get off the ground 
with access to the University’s world-leading 
compute resource and support from dedicated 
machine learning engineers. 

 → ai@cam has also played an enabling role, 

supporting the AI community to respond to external 
opportunities, such as UKRI funding schemes, 
providing support for large-scale funding bids, and 
developing philanthropic and industry partnerships.

These initiatives are rooted in both community need and 
public interest. They are shaped by over 400 engagements 
with  researchers,  policymakers,  partner  organisations, 
and the public across 2023-24, and have been guided by 
our cross-institutional Steering Group.

Engagement  with  early  career  researchers  has  been  a 
strong  feature  of  our  first  year.  Out  of  73  expressions 
of interest in our AI-deas call for projects, 41 came from 
early  career  staff,  and  26  (of  46)  of  our  HPC  pioneers 
are  PhD  students.  Feedback  from  these  engagements 
suggests that our approach to convening the community 
has helped researchers find new collaborators and unlock 
access to resources.

1

Collaborations with University of Cambridge Development 
and  Alumni  Relations  (CUDAR)  and  the  Strategic 
Partnerships  Office  are  building  connections  with 
stakeholders  in  industry  and  philanthropy  to  help  scale 
our activities and our next year of operations will bring 
further work in this area.

“

Our first 
year of 
operations has 
established 
ai@cam as an 
incubator for 
interdisciplinary 
AI that addresses 
real-world needs.

0 1

100+

Number of people consulted to 
create Cambridge’s AI vision

46 

46 research projects from  
20 Departments across  
6 Schools onboarded to the 
Dawn system.

400+

Number of participants in 
workshops and events

Breadth and diversity of 
engagement in the AI-deas 
scheme:

73

73 applications from  
27 Departments

£750k

Resulting in 5 funded 
challenges, with a total  
value of £750k

19 

Working across 19 
Departments spread  
over all 6 Schools.

£190k+

External income 
generated

£100M+

Applications pending  
or in development.

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048 
08

008
008

1

0 1

ai@cam’s vision for a 
world-class AI research 
resource

ai@cam offers a mechanism for the University 
to be a global force in AI research, a world-
leader in education, and an engine for 
innovation that delivers social benefit. By 
investing in core research capabilities and 
creating collaborations that drive progress
in areas of scientific and social concern, the 
University can build a world-class AI research 
resource. 

By  building  these  pillars,  Cambridge  can 
ensure  it  has  the  talent,  connections,  and 
collaborative culture to scale its research and 
education activities, leading a new wave of AI 
innovation. This will continue to be a priority 
for the ai@cam mission in the coming years.

This vision is built on three pillars of activity:

 → Growing our research capability:  

cluster hiring of new faculty, machine 
learning engineers, and PhD students  
can create a critical mass of expertise 
in AI technologies and their safe and 
effective use. 

 → Building a core of activity around world-
class compute: new HPC systems offer 
an opportunity to convene core AI teams 
around world-leading research facilities. 

 → Creating connections for impact: 

interdisciplinary engagements with policy, 
industry, civil society, and the public offer 
opportunities for creating new challenge-
led research programmes and enhancing 
the impact of existing activities. 

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISHSECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISHSection2
Introduction

010

2

02

“

Supporting the next generation 
of AI innovation is central to 
ai@cam’s vision, and has been 
a major focus of our first year’s 
work. Our AI-deas initiative is 
providing funding and expertise 
for innovative projects to 
respond to critical areas of need, 
delivering AI that serves society.

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048012

0012
0012

Introduction from the chair

Society  faces  deeply  complex  challenges, 
from  economic  growth  to  population  health, 
to climate change. The potential of AI to help 
tackle these challenges is clear, but technology, 
policy, and practice in this fast-moving domain 
are not yet positioned to realise this promise. 
Achieving  positive  societal  impact  with  AI 
requires interdisciplinary research that is deeply 
connected to real-world needs. Universities have 
a  crucial  role  to  play  as  an  incubator  for  this 
interdisciplinary innovation.

In a year that has brought rapid progress in AI 
technologies and a new wave of public debate 
about their implications, we’ve been delighted 
to launch ai@cam as a new mission to deliver 
the University’s vision for AI that serves science, 
citizens, and society. Leveraging world-leading 
research  from  across  the  University,  ai@cam 
will  create  connections  between  disciplines, 
sectors, and communities to unlock a new wave 
of  progress  in  AI  for  the  benefit  of  science, 
citizens, and society.

Supporting the next generation of AI innovation 
is  central  to  ai@cam’s  vision,  and  has  been  a 
major focus of our first year’s work. Our AI-deas 
initiative is providing funding and expertise for 
innovative projects to respond to critical areas 
of  need,  delivering AI that  serves  society. The 
first AI-deas funding awards are supporting five 
ambitious projects using AI to tackle challenges 
spanning  fertility,  climate  change,  mental 
health,  language  equity,  and  public  services 
delivery. These projects were selected following 
a  process  that  was  both  highly  competitive 
and designed to catalyse new cross-University 
collaborations.  The  resulting  challenges  are 
interdisciplinary by design – the five challenges 
engage 19 Departments across 6 Schools – and 
rooted in public purpose. It has been fantastic 
to  see  the  University  community  rally  behind 
our  first  flagship  initiative,  and  particularly 
exciting to see how this approach has caught 
the  imagination  of  Cambridge’s  early  career 
researchers.  

At a time when technology change has brought 
serious questions about the risks of AI to public 
conversations about its future, bridging the gap 
between research and policy is more important 
than  ever.  ai@cam’s  Policy  Lab  is  helping 
connect  the  research  advances  coming  from 
labs across Cambridge to the issues of concern 
to members of the public and policymakers. We 
launched this initiative in the heat of discussions 
around the UK Government’s AI Safety Summit 
in 2023, with partnerships that connect across 
the Bennett Institute, Kavli Centre for Ethics, 
Science,  and  the  Public,  Minderoo  Centre  for 

“

Cambridge has an 
ambitious vision for  
AI that serves 
science, citizens, 
and society. 

2

02

Technology  and  Democracy,  and  Cambridge 
Centre for Science and Policy. This collaboration 
has allowed us to convene diverse conversations 
about AI with the public and policymakers, from a 
double-decker bus on Parker’s Piece to the Palace 
of Westminster. We look forward to scaling this 
initiative in 2024. 

Our 2022 AI review started a conversation within 
Cambridge  about  how  the  University  can  work 
as  a  team  to  build  our  AI  capabilities.  We’ve 
been  delighted  to  be  joined  by  a  brilliant  cross-
University  Steering  Group  to  take  forward  our 
work, and look forward to being able to onboard 
our core staff team soon. Working with CUDAR, 
the  Strategic  Partnerships  Office,  Innovate 
Cambridge, Research Computing Services, Centre 
for Data Driven Discovery, and University senior 
leadership  team  to  find  ways  to  enhance  the 
Cambridge  AI  community  has  been  a  priority  in 
year  one  of  our  work.  These  collaborations  are 
bridging  between  the  research  community  and 
infrastructural  support,  for  example  with  46 
Pioneer Projects gaining access to the University’s 
new  Dawn  supercomputer.  We  hope  these 
coalitions will lay the foundations for wider impact 
for ai@cam in the longer-term. Cambridge has an 
exciting vision for a unique AI research resource, 
and we look forward to driving progress towards 
this vision.

The ai@cam review identified five core functions 
needed  to  deliver  the  University’s  AI  ambitions. 
Our first annual report, presented here, introduces 
some  of  the  highlights  from  our  first  year  of 
building  these  functions.  In  the  longer-term, 
we  believe  ai@cam  offers  a  mechanism  for  the 
University to build a strategic AI research resource, 
through  investment  in  research  capability, 
infrastructure, and interdisciplinary collaborations. 
This is an ambitious vision, but one that is firmly 
rooted  in  both  the  aspirations  of  the  University 
community  and  the  University’s  public  purpose. 
We look forward to continuing to work with the 
University  to  shape  the  ai@cam  mission  in  the 
coming years. 

N.Lawrence J.Montgomery

Neil Lawrence, 
Chair, ai@cam 

Jessica Montgomery, 
Director, ai@cam

STARTFINISHSECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISHSECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAM014

Key
Highlights:

MAR, 2024

Brought 46 HPC 
Pioneer Projects to 
the Dawn system, 
with onboarding 
activities including 
software engineering 
support and a training 
hackathon.

FEB, 2024

Awarded 5 ambitious 
AI-deas challenges 
approx. £150k each to 
develop their work. 

NOV, 2023

DEC, 2023

JAN, 2024

02

Convened public 
dialogues to explore 
hopes and fears for 
AI and supported the 
People’s Panel on AI 
that reported into 
AI Summit Fringe 
programme. 3

Launched a HPC 
Pioneer Project 
scheme to facilitate 
researcher access to 
the new Dawn facility.

Led discussions 
about open source 
innovation at the AI 
House in Davos. 5

SEPT, 2023

OCT, 2023

MAY, 2023

Contributed to 
workshops on 
foundation models 
with Government 
Office for 
Science, European 
Commission, and 
Competition and 
Markets Authority.

FEB, 2023

APR, 2023

Workshopped ideas 
to support cross-
University teaching 
and learning activities 
in AI.

Convened first 
Steering Group 
meeting to consider 
flagship initiatives.

Contributed evidence 
to the House of Lords 
Digital Committee. 2

JUL, 2023

Launched AI-deas as 
a flagship initiative 
to build challenge-
led, interdisciplinary 
research programmes.

JUN, 2023

Explored ways of 
working to deliver 
interdisciplinary AI at 
scale at a workshop 
with Professional 
Services Staff.

DEC, 2022

JAN, 2023

MAR, 2023

Convened a sandpit to 
support researchers 
across Departments 
to respond to the 
UKRI AI Hub bid call 
and contributed to the 
University AI CDT bid 
review process. 

2

Established a cross-
University Steering 
Group to guide the 
development of the 
ai@cam mission.

Delivered the AI 
Council’s briefing 
paper on foundation 
models to DSIT. 1

Co-published the 
Bennett Institute 
and Minderoo Centre 
for Technology and 
Democracy’s policy 
brief on generative AI. 4 

“

Our annual report, presented here, 
introduces some of the highlights 
from our first year. We look forward 
to continuing to work with the 
University to shape the ai@cam 
mission in the coming years.

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

https://mlatcl.github.io/publications/large-language-model-opportunity.html and https://mlatcl.github.io/publications/ai-council-foundation-models-policy-paper.html 

https://committees.parliament.uk/event/19126/formal-meeting-oral-evidence-session/ 

https://connectedbydata.org/projects/2023-peoples-panel-on-ai

https://www.mctd.ac.uk/which-path-should-the-uk-take-to-build-national-capability-for-generative-ai/

https://www.aihousedavos.com/program and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_YULkhecm4

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048Section 3
Progress 
against 
strategic 
objectives

016

3

03

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048018

1

Nurture a dynamic interdisciplinary research 
community

Interdisciplinar y  research  is  vital  to  bridge 
technological  innovation  to  public  value.  The 
University is already home to an active community 
of researchers who are passionate about delivering 
public benefit through the development and use of 
AI. There is a strategic opportunity to develop this 
community.  In  response,  ai@cam  is  providing  an 
interdisciplinary  research  incubator  that  creates 
connections across the University, links researchers 
with  infrastructural  support,  and  helps  scale 
promising initiatives.  

In  Summer  2023,  we  launched  our  first  initiative 
–  AI-deas  –  to  provide  funding  and  expertise  for 
innovative  projects  tackling  issues  of  pressing 
concern  to  science  and  society.  This  initiative  will 
provide funding, connections, and support that will 
help  researchers  take  their  ideas  from  innovation 
to  application.  By  championing  projects  with 
real-world  applications,  AI-deas  aims  to  convene 
multidisciplinary  AI  research  teams  that  help 
create  a  sustainable,  inclusive  society.  There  is  an 
opportunity  in  its  next  phase  of  development  for 
AI-deas to extend this interdisciplinary AI incubator 
to fundamental research.

AI-deas has brought together experts from across 
the  University,  engaging  a  broad  spectrum  of 
perspectives  and  knowledge  in  the  design  of 
ambitious research agendas. Our initial call for input 
received 73 project proposals from 27 Departments 
that  engaged  all  6  Schools.  A  cross-University 
workshop  in  November  2023  translated  these 
proposals  to  challenge-led  programme  pitches, 
catalysing  new  connections  between  researchers 
to produce challenges that are interdisciplinary by 
design and rooted in public purpose. 

Five AI-deas were selected for funding in 2024 (Boxes 
1-5).  These  challenges  draw  in  expertise  from  19 
Departments,  and  researchers varying  in  seniority 
from  PhD  students  to  professors.  Early  career 
researcher engagement with the scheme has been 
strong, and it is clear that AI-deas offers a mechanism 
to nurture the next generation of AI pioneers within 
the  University. AI-deas  has  also  provided  a vehicle 
to  engage  the  University’s  strategic  research 
communities,  helping  supercharge  their  work.  The 
AI  for  Climate  and  Nature  challenge,  for  example, 
offers  a  route  to  bridge  between  the  University’s 
flagship  missions  in  AI  and  climate  change,  while 
also  engaging  climate-  and  biodiversity-related 
initiatives  across  Departments.  Launch  of  the 
funded  projects  in  Spring  2024  attracted  media 
coverage  from  Research  Fortnight  and  POLITICO, 
which  introduced  the  challenge  areas  themselves 
and  positioned  Cambridge  as  a  thought-leader  in 
delivering innovation for public benefit. 

Alongside  its  work  with  the  AI-deas  projects,  ai@
cam has provided support for a range of large-scale 
funding bids from researchers across the University. 
This  has  included  convening  to  help  develop 
collaborative funding bids and letters of support for 
major funding proposals. In the coming year, we will 
also consider how we can build on the community 
energy behind AI-deas and help progress a range of 
projects connected to the scheme.

AI-deas: Challenge development workshop

Early  2024  also  brought  the  launch  of  our  HPC 
Pioneer  Project  scheme.  The  new  Dawn  system, 
being  developed  by  a  partnership  between  the 
University of Cambridge, Dell, Intel, and StackHPC, 
offers the opportunity to accelerate AI research in 
the University. With the aim of ensuring researchers 
across the community can capitalise on the benefits 
Dawn  offers,  ai@cam  convened  the  HPC  Pioneer 
Project  Scheme  to  help  design  interfaces  and 
working processes that enhance the accessibility of 
the system to communities across the University. 

A  joint  call  from  ai@cam,  Research  Computing 
Services, the Cambridge Open Zettascale Lab, the 
Cambridge Centre for Data Driven Discovery, and the 
Institute of Computing for Climate Science offered 
pioneer projects early access to Dawn and support 
using  the  new  system.  It  received  46  applications 
from 20 departments, which are being onboarded 
across March and April. Working with this cohort of 
pioneer projects will help tailor Dawn’s operations to 
the needs of the AI and simulation communities. For 
example,  lessons  from  these  interactions  will  feed 
into the design of support services built around the 
new  compute  facility.  Bridging  between  research 
and infrastructure in this way can help the University 
build  a  world-class  compute  environment  for  AI 
research.

This  collaboration  has  also  resulted  in  a  major 
funding bid submitted in February 2024.

3

03

1

[BOX 01]

Responsible AI for better 
lifelong brain and mental 
health

Brain  diseases  and  mental  health 
disorders  are  taking  a  toll  on  people 
throughout their lives. Dementia is the 
leading cause of death in England and 
Wales,  and  different  mental  health 
disorders lead to significant reductions 
in life expectancy.

This project will use the latest advances 
in  AI  to  better  understand  brain 
health and disease. It will explore the 
environmental, social and neurological 
factors at play, to develop responsible 
AI-driven  tools  that  help  clinicians 
predict,  diagnose  and  treat  brain 
diseases and mental health disorders.

“AI-deas is a springboard for thinking 
outside  the  box  about  using  AI  to 
tackle real-world challenges like those 
associated  with  brain  and  mental 
health  disorders.  Brain  and  mental 
health  disorders  touch  every  family. 
Building  robust  and  responsible 
AI  tools  has  the  potential  to  help 
clinicians  diagnose  early,  improve 
patient wellbeing  and  outcomes  and 
reduce misdiagnosis, making resources 
available  to  people  that  need  them 
the most.”

— Professor Zoe Kourtzi, AI-deas 
challenge lead

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048[BOX 04] 

Decision-making with 
AI in connected places 
and cities: Developing an 
ethical and responsible 
innovation rooted 
approach for public 
value creation

Public sector use of AI is growing, with some 
local authorities in England already using Large 
Language Models and predictive analytics to 
make city-scale decisions. It is important that 
the use of AI to make decisions is ethical and 
leads to the desired outcomes.

This  project  aims  to  investigate  how  local 
authorities  in  England  are  using  AI  to  make 
decisions about issues such as placemaking, land 
use and mobility, and sustainable water supply 
systems to create public value. The project will 
develop resources for local authorities to make 
ethical and informed choices and the use of AI 
as part of digitalisation initiatives.

Dr  Kwadwo  Oti-Sarpong,  AI-deas  challenge 
lead,  said:  “We’re  excited  to  be  one  of  the 
winners  of  AI-deas  and  work  on  this  project 
with  practitioners  across  disciplines  to 
shape  the  future  of  public  sector  decision-
making using AI in creating connected places. 
Understanding how to practically root AI use in 
ethical considerations, and showing how that 
can be done, will significantly change how we 
create the future we want.”

020

[BOX 02]

From conception to 
childhood: Revolutionising 
women’s health, female 
fertility and early infant 
neurodevelopment using AI

The UK has the largest gender health gap in the G20 
and  declining  fertility  rates,  with  women’s  health 
issues not well understood.

This  project  aims  to  develop  more  affordable,  less 
invasive  and  more  accurate  AI-assisted  tests  that 
can be used throughout the conception to childhood 
journey.  These  tests  will  be  used  to  enhance  and 
personalise  fertility  outcomes,  and  support  the 
transition  to  parenting.  This  research  will  play  a 
key  part  in  improving  fertility  and  women’s  health 
outcomes and shed light on the still largely unknown 
cellular, molecular and genetic mechanisms governing 
the development of life.

Dr Staci Weiss, AI-deas challenge co-lead said: “AI-
deas provides an interdisciplinary platform bringing 
together  data  and  new  AI  analytic  approaches  to 

[BOX 03]

Improving language equity 
and inclusion through AI

Using language to communicate is something many 
take for granted. However, a significant proportion 
of  the  UK  population  find  spoken  or  written 
communication more difficult due to sensory, neural 
or  linguistic  challenges  such  as  hearing  loss,  brain 
injury or language barriers, and can face substantial 
disadvantages in many aspects of their lives.

3

accelerate  identification  of  reproductive  health 
biomarkers from embryo through to neonate.”

Mo Vali, AI-deas challenge co-lead said: “We will seek 
to revolutionise reproductive health technology using 
state-of-the-art AI methods, leveraging Cambridge’s 
long  tradition  of  research  in  this  field.  Translating 
our research from lab to clinic by developing rigorous 
tests  to  improve  clinical  outcomes  will  benefit  the 
wider public and help to ease the NHS burden.”

This  project  aims  to  develop  new  AI  methods  to 
understand and address these challenges to improve 
equity  and  inclusion.  It  will  develop  new  ways  to 
support  people with  language  and  communication 
difficulties. For example, with AI we can assess and 
diagnose  common  language  and  communication 
conditions  at  scale,  and  develop  technologies  such 
as  intelligent  hearing  aids,  real-time  machine 
translation,  or  other  language  aids  to  support 
affected individuals at home, work or school.

Matt  Davis,  AI-deas  challenge  lead,  said:  “New  AI 
technologies  are  changing  our  day-to-day  lives: 
we  speak  rather  than  type  text  messages  on  our 
phones,  and  have  conversations  with  Alexa  or  Siri. 
As  these  systems  become  more  common  they 
may reinforce the barriers faced by those who find 
communicating  through  language  more  difficult. 
Cambridge  University  hosts  the  UK’s  largest 
community  of  researchers  working  on  speech  and 
language technology and have a remarkable breadth 
and  depth  of  expertise  in  understanding  the  real-
world  impact of language  challenges  in  education, 
health  or  work.  This  project  brings  these  research 
communities together to develop new AI technologies 
to  support  people  who  find  communicating  using 
language a daily challenge in order to improve equity 
and inclusion.”

[BOX 05]

AI for climate and nature

03

The  twin  climate  and  biodiversity  crises  are 
two  of  the  world’s  most  complex  challenges 
to  tackle.  This  project  aims  to  develop  AI 
approaches for bringing together a wide range 
of datasets and accelerating the collation of 
information.

This  work  will  provide  up  to  date,  relevant 
and  robust  information  for  researchers  and 
decision-makers  working  on  climate  and 
biodiversity  conservation  –  opening  up  the 
possibility  for  more  targeted  and  effective 
solutions to some of our world’s most pressing 
climate and biodiversity challenges. 

This  project  is  a  collaboration  between 
Cambridge  Zero,  Cambridge  Conservation 
Initiative, Conservation Evidence, Institute for 
Computing for Climate Science, Conservation 
Research  Institute,  Centre  for  Landscape 
Regeneration,  Cambridge  Centre  for  Carbon 
Credits  and  Cambridge  Centre  for  Earth 
Observation.

Anil Madhavapeddy, AI-deas challenge co-lead, 
said: “Mitigating the impacts of climate change 
while  maintaining  and  restoring  biodiversity 
demands urgent, evidence-based action. We’re 
excited  to  bring  together  an  interdisciplinary 
team  across  computer  science,  ecology, 
climate and conservation to use AI to empower 
decision-makers to equitably tackle the biggest 
challenge of our generation.”

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048022

3

2

Build partnerships and 
collaborations that centre 
societal interests and ethics  
in AI

03

ai@cam  embraces  a  spirit  of  openness  and 
collaboration. We want to bring a diversity of 
perspectives to bear on the development of AI, 
prioritising  the  involvement  of  communities 
affected by AI, and partnering across academia, 
policy, civil society, and industry to deliver our 
vision. 

Alongside the internal collaborations nurtured 
by the AI-deas initiative, a partnership between 
ai@cam  and  the  Kavli  Centre  for  Ethics, 
Science,  and  the  Public  has  been  exploring 
how the University can centre public voices in 
AI  research.  In  October  and  November  2023, 
ai@cam  supported  two  Hopes  and  Fears 
Labs  –  a  flagship  programme  from  the  Kavli 
Centre that convenes open dialogue between 
researchers and the public on critical areas of 
science – focused on AI. Across the two days, 
at  sites  in  Cambridge  and  London,  over  100 
members of the public joined conversations with 
Cambridge  University  researchers  on  topics 
spanning health, environment, arts and culture, 
and  policy.   This  collaboration  also  supported 
a  Citizen’s  Panel  on  AI,  led  by  the  charity 
Connected by Data, which invited participants 
from  across  the  UK  to  deliberate  on  current 
issues in AI policy and develop recommendations 
to enhance its democratic governance.

Amidst heated debate about the risks associated 
with  frontier  AI  systems,  a  collaboration 
between  ai@cam,  the  Bennett  Institute  for 
Public  Policy,  and  the  Minderoo  Centre  for 
Technology and Democracy set out to connect 
Cambridge  expertise  to  policy  conversations. 
Published ahead of the International AI Safety 
Summit, a policy brief considered what national 
capability the UK needs to develop and deploy 
responsible frontier AI systems. This briefing was 
covered by The Times and POLITICO, alongside 
specialist publications such as The Next Web, 
The Information Age, Open Access Government, 
and  the  Innovation  News  Network.  Alongside 
this  publication,  a  series  of  six  ai@cam  blog 
posts  from  different  disciplinary  perspectives 
explored the risks and opportunities of AI, and 
the actions needed in response. 

6.  For video summaries of these sessions, see: https://www.kcesp.

ac.uk/hopes-and-fears-lab-ai-edition-videos/ 

7. 

https://ai.cam.ac.uk/news/2023-11-01-cambridge-perspectives-

genai-governance

“

We want 
to bring a 
diversity of 
perspectives  
to bear on the 
development of AI

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048024

3

Create spaces for innovative 
projects to spin up and respond 
to areas of need

The HPC Pioneer Project scheme is one example 
of  the  enabling  role  that  ai@cam  is  playing 
across the University. By connecting across the 
community of researchers and centres with an 
interest in AI, ai@cam is helping the University 
respond to areas of need locally and nationally. 
Other  examples  of  such  enabling  activities  in 
year one have included:

 → Supporting the School of Technology 

Postgraduate Education team to review 
and shortlist bids for funding to create 
Centres for Doctoral Training;

 → Convening 35 researchers with an interest 

in UKRI’s funding call for AI hubs to 
network and develop their ideas for bids;

 → Working with the Strategic Partnerships 
Office to provide a point of contact 
for industrial collaborators to develop 
strategic partnerships with the University.

 → Developing relationships with international 

collaborators, with the University 
International Team.

 → Advising Innovate Cambridge on how to 

develop its approach to AI.

By  providing  a  hub  that  connects  research, 
business,  civil  society,  and  policy,  ai@cam  will 
support the deployment of AI for wider societal 
and economic benefit. To achieve its ambition 
of  being  a  hub  for  responsible  AI  innovation, 
the University needs spaces to bring together 
collaborators  from  different  domains  in  an 
environment  that  encourages  knowledge 
exchange and connects to society’s needs. The 
extent  to  which  traditional  innovation  spaces 
are useful in AI is an open question. In its next 
phase  of  development,  ai@cam  will  explore 
how  new  physical  spaces  can  help  connect 
AI  innovation  to  societal  benefit,  through 
mechanisms that combine elements of start-up 
support; responsible innovation; public dialogue; 
and business engagement.

3

03

Hopes & Fears Event

“

By providing a 
hub that connects 
research, business, 
civil society, and 
policy, ai@cam 
will support the 
deployment of AI 
for wider societal 
and economic 
benefit. 

4

Widen access to AI knowledge 
and skills across and outside 
the University

The  University  aspires  to  be  an  innovator  in 
AI  education,  creating  learning  programmes 
that  advance  AI  technologies,  that  embed  AI 
knowledge across disciplines, and that support 
the  next  generation  of AI  leaders  in  research, 
business,  policy  and  society.  Both  within  and 
outside the University, diverse communities of 
learners could benefit from wider access to AI 
knowledge.  Delivering  these  aspirations  will 
require a step-change in access to AI training 
and education. 

To  explore  how  the  University  can  develop  its 
teaching  offer  to  support  these  outcomes, 
in  Spring  2023  ai@cam  convened  a  cross-
University  workshop  on  AI  teaching  and 
learning. This workshop identified the need for 
an infrastructure for AI teaching and training 
that  can  accommodate  the  needs  of  diverse 
learner  groups.  Such  an  infrastructure  would 
allow  learners  to  understand  what  learning 
materials would suit their needs, access those 

materials  through  taught  courses  and  self-
study,  and  apply  the  results  of  their  learning 
in  practice.  Discussions  generated  ideas  for 
flexible re-use of teaching material, open access 
repositories, and workshops and study groups to 
expand access to AI knowledge. While ai@cam 
recruits a core team that can help develop these 
ideas,  some  have  already  been  trialed  under 
the auspices of the Accelerate Programme for 
Scientific Discovery (see Next Page).

Underpinning these discussions about teaching 
and  learning  is  a  strategic  question  about 
capability building in core AI domains. In June 
2023,  guided  by  discussions  at  its  Steering 
Group,  ai@cam  convened  a  cross-institution 
group of Professional Service Staff to explore 
organisational  interventions  to  support  such 
capability building. 

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048026

0026
0026

The Accelerate Programme 
for Scientific Discovery

The Accelerate Programme for Scientific Discovery, led 
by Neil Lawrence and Jessica Montgomery and funded 
by Schmidt Futures, is an approx. £7M cross-University 
initiative equipping future research leaders with the AI 
skills to drive a new wave of scientific progress. ai@cam 
is leveraging synergies with this initiative to develop its 
approach to teaching and training. Since its creation in 
2020, Accelerate has trained over 400 researchers in data 
science and AI through its taught courses and workshops, 
and its community building activities have reached over 
800 participants. 

Accelerate’s  aim  is  to  create  a  pipeline  of  activities 
that allow researchers to progress from learning basic 

3

coding  skills  to  deploying  advanced  AI  methods.  The 
team currently deliver five types of learning support [see 
opposite panel].

The  Accelerate  Programme  will  run  to  March  2026. 
Community-building is central to its continuing impact 
over  the  long-term,  and  current  activities  are  being 
designed to encourage peer mentoring and community 
support. There are also opportunities to embed this work 
in the University’s vision for its AI research resource (set 
out later in this document).

03

Self-learning

Researchers seeking an introduction to Python programming – set in the scientific 
context – can register for an Accelerate self-learning module on Python for Science. 
To date, over 400 participants have registered for this course. Alongside this 
interactive material, Accelerate-supported researchers make their lecture materials 
openly accessible, allowing learners to explore topics in Advanced Data Science and 
Machine Learning and the Physical World. In 2024, a collaboration with Cambridge 
University Press and Assessment – via Cambridge Advanced Online – will explore how 
these materials can be made more readily usable by different learner communities. 

Taught Courses

Accelerate supports two structured courses for researchers seeking to build their 
data science and AI skills. A five-week Data Science for Science Residency equips 
participants with core skills in data science, while a one-year Machine Learning 
Academy introduces more advanced AI methods. Both are convened in partnership 
with Cambridge Spark. 

Training Workshops

Alongside these courses, Accelerate delivers one-day training workshops that 
provide practical support in using AI techniques. These focus on: Large Language 
Models; Software Engineering Best Practices; Data Pipelines; and Diffusion Models. 

Engineering Support

Accelerate’s AI Clinic offers tailored support for researchers as they implement AI in 
their science. Researchers can submit a request for support, which is responded to by 
Accelerate’s machine learning engineers.

Peer Mentoring

Community-building activities – including events, networking sessions, and workshops 
– help scale the impact of Accelerate-driven courses through peer mentoring and 
support. 

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISHSECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH028

5

Connect Cambridge 
expertise to national  
AI priorities 

At  a  time  of  heightened  public  interest  in 
AI,  access  to  trustworthy  information  and 
insights  to  inform  policy  debates  is  more 
important than  ever. The  University  can  offer 
policymakers  access  to  a  wealth  of  expertise 
and  the  opportunity  to  trial  new  ideas.  ai@
cam’s Policy Lab provides a forum to connect 
stakeholders from research, public, private, and 
philanthropic sectors to enable such evidence-
based, informed policymaking. 

Our first Policy Lab activities connected to the 
UK Government’s AI Safety Summit in Autumn 
2023, resulting in a policy brief on Generative 
AI  in  collaboration  with  the  Bennett  Institute 
and  Minderoo  Centre  for  Technology  and 
Democracy.  Across  2023  and  2024,  ai@cam 
has  convened  a  range  of  policy  engagement 
activities that continue the conversation about 
how to bridge from technology development to 
public value. 

These include      

ai@cam has also established an international 
presence, through a collaboration with strategic 
partners in Switzerland. A series of workshops 
with the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign 
Affairs  and  ETH  Zurich  resulted  in  an  ai@
cam-convened  panel on AI governance at the 
AI House in Davos in January 2024, alongside 
the  launch  of the  International  Compute  and 
AI Network.

By working closely with policymakers, ai@cam 
will  facilitate  the  development  of  informed, 
practical  policies  for  AI,  ensuring  that  these 
powerful technologies connect to public benefit. 
For  example,  workshops  with  the  Centre  for 
Science and Policy in Spring-Summer 2024 will 
convene  on  topics  including  life  sciences  and 
education.

A   w o r k s t ra n d   o n   c o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,   i n 
collaboration with the central communications 
team,  has  enabled  this  work.  ai@cam  has 
created  a  new  communications  strategy, 
and  looks  forward  to  being  joined  by  a 
Communications  and  Engagement  Manager 
to deliver this strategy in the coming months.

2 roundtables
Two roundtables with Peter 
Kyle MP, Shadow Secretary of 
State for Science, Innovation 
and Technology, which explored 
AI governance and the role of 
AI in research and innovation. 

3 local councils
A roundtable with three local 
councils, which developed 
connections between their AI 
strategies and local innovation 
activities. 

2 evidence 
sessions
2 contributions to the House 
of Lords Digital Committee, 
helping inform their inquiry into 
Large Language Models.

3

6 Government 
bodies
1:1 meetings with the Department 
for Science, Innovation, and 
Technology, Cabinet Office, the AI 
Safety Institute, the Department 
for Education, the Department 
for Business and Trade, and the 
Committee for Standards in  
Public Life. 

Panel discussion on open source technology and AI safety 
at the AI House in Davos, January 2024

Professor Neil Lawrence speaking to the House of Lords 
Communications and Digital Committee, September 2023

03

Our collaborators

 → Accelerate Programme for Scientific 

Discovery

 → Addenbrooke’s Hospital
 → AI4ER CDT 
 → Bennett Institute for Public Policy
 → Cambridge Centre for Data Driven 

Discovery

 → Cambridge Centre for Earth Observation 
 → Cambridge Centre for Science and Policy
 → Cambridge Conservation Initiative
 → Cambridge University Development and 

Alumni Relations Office

 → Cambridge Zero
 → Centre for Carbon Credits
 → Centre for Landscape Regeneration  
 → Communications team
 → Connected by Data
 → Conservation Research Institute
 → Department of Applied Mathematics and 

Theoretical Physics

 → Department of Architecture 
 → Department of Computer Science and 

Technology

 → Department of Engineering
 → Department of Geography
 → Department of Land Economy
 → Department of Physics 
 → Department of Physiology, Development 

and Neuroscience

 → Department of Plant Sciences
 → Department of Psychiatry
 → Department of Psychology
 → Department of Zoology
 → Department of Zoology
 → ETH Zurich Innovate Cambridge
 → Faculty of Education
 → Faculty of Modern and Medieval 

Languages and Linguistics

 → Innovate Cambridge
 → Institute for Computing for Climate 

Science 

 → Institute of Continuing Education
 → Kavli Centre for Ethics, Science, and the 

Public

 → Leverhulme Centre for the Future of 

Intelligence

 → Minderoo Centre for Technology and 

Democracy

 → MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
 → Open Zettascale Lab
 → Research Computing Services
 → Strategic Partnerships Office
 → Swiss Federal Department of Foreign 

Affairs

 → The Lister Hospital, HCA
 → University Information Services 

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048Section 4
Looking 
Ahead

030

4

0 4

“

 The University  
of Cambridge aspires 
to be a global force  
in AI research,  
a world-leader  
in education, and an 
engine for innovation 
that delivers  
social benefit.

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048032

A vision for AI 
at Cambridge

The community engagement that led to the creation of 
ai@cam  articulated  a  vision  for  AI  at  the  University.  In 
this vision, the University is both the heart of a vibrant 
local AI innovation ecosystem and a strategic AI research 
resource with national and international influence. It is a 
global force in AI research, a world-leader in education, and 

an engine for innovation that delivers social benefit. ai@
cam provides a mechanism to realise these aspirations.

Inspired  by  our  consultation  with  Cambridge’s  AI 
community,  we  envisage  a  world-class  AI  research 
resource built on three pillars of activity:

Capability: 

A critical mass of expertise in AI technologies 
- and their safe and effective use - through 
significant investment in new faculty, machine 
learning engineers, and funding for PhD 
students. 

Compute: 

Cutting-edge compute resources that allow 
researchers to rapidly train, test, and deploy AI 
tools, with support to ensure these innovations 
are developed safely and responsibly. 

Challenges: 

3

A step-change in interdisciplinary collaboration 
that identifies and responds to real-world 
challenges in science, policy, industry, and civil 
society, facilitated by a shared space that 
provides a focal point for AI activities across 
the University. 

In the near-term, ai@cam is building a foundation for AI that 
serves  science,  citizens,  and  society.  Our  AI-deas,  Policy  Lab, 
Accelerate Science training, and industry engagement activities 
are catalysing interdisciplinary collaboration and challenge-led 
research.  Our  work  with  Research  Computing  Services  and 
collaborators on the HPC Pioneer Project Scheme and Dawn 2 
compute funding bid are helping develop a world-class compute 
facility.  Early  discussions  with  the  Department  of  Computer 
Science  and  Department  of  Engineering  are  exploring  the 
creation of a shared office for core technical teams, from where 
we can scale collaborative activities. 

In  the  longer-term,  delivering  this  vision  will  require 
transformational funding. 

 → Cluster hiring in interdisciplinary AI would allow the 
University to rapidly scale its AI capabilities across 
departments through recruitment of new faculty and PhD 
students. 

 → Investments in a shared collaborative space could unlock 
new interdisciplinary innovations within and outside the 
University. 

 → Resources to facilitate engagement with policy, industry, 
and civil society could generate partnerships that identify 
new directions for challenge-led research. 

Each of these contributes to an enabling environment in which 
Cambridge has the talent, connections, and collaborative culture 
to  scale  its  research  and  education  activities.  ai@cam  and 
CUDAR are creating a proposal that will set out this vision. This  
will  continue  to  be  a  priority  for  the  ai@cam  mission  in  the 
coming years.

0 4

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048034

4

ai@cam’s  
approach 

We aim to be outward-facing, 
inclusive, and innovative in our 
approach to developing the 
ai@cam mission. 

In support of these goals, the 
following tenets currently 
shape our work:

One

We prioritise real-world challenges 
and societal benefit. 

Two

We centre interdisciplinarity in  
our work. 

0 4

Three

We collaborate for scale  
and impact. 

Four

We seek new ways of working and 
innovative solutions. 

Five

We seek to raise all boats, bringing 
benefits across the Cambridge 
community.

As our work progresses, we’ll 
continue to review these tenets. 

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048Section 5
2024-2025

036

5

“

The next year will 
see ai@cam launch 
further flagship 
initiatives, develop 
its portfolio of 
foundational 
activities, and scope 
future initiatives 
in response to 
community needs. 

05

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048038

5

Nurture a dynamic 
interdisciplinary research 
community

FOUNDATION:

Our  AI-deas  initiative  has  energised  communities  across  the  University,  and  is  supporting  
five challenge-led research programmes. 

FUTURE:

 → Building on this successful first phase 

of implementation, in the next year ai@
cam will establish its interdisciplinary 
research incubator that supports the 
first cohort of AI-deas to move from idea 
to implementation. This incubator will 
facilitate networking and mentorship, 
support partnership development, 
enhance internal and external 
communications, and provide high-quality 
technical support. Challenge teams will 
be able to scale their work and begin to 
translate their ideas to wider impact. 

 → Alongside supporting the five challenges 
funded by AI-deas, we will work with the 
large pool of applicants to the AI-deas 

scheme to develop activities that help 
build this community. 

 → If the University’s 2024 HPC funding bid is 
successful, we will support an expansion 
of the HPC Pioneer Project activities, 
and work with the Research Computing 
Services team to deliver a world-class AI 
computing research resource.

 → In the longer-term, there are opportunities 
to expand this work through cluster hiring. 
We will work with CUDAR to progress a 
proposal for transformational investment 
in AI at the University.  

Build partnerships 
and collaborations 
that centre societal 
interests and ethics

FOUNDATION:

Our  collaboration  with  the  Kavli  Centre  for 
Ethics,  Science,  and  the  Public  (KCESP) 
has  established  a  proof  of  concept  for  the 
integration of public voices in the Cambridge 
AI research community. 

FUTURE:

 → We will collaborate with KCESP, CSaP and 
CUDAR to create a vision for an ambitious 
Citizens Assembly on AI and to secure 
resources for this work. This Assembly will 
convene citizen-led deliberations about AI 
that connect directly to research, policy, 
and practice, and will provide a forum 
for Cambridge research to centre citizen 
voices in its AI research. It will be unique in 
both its scale and its innovative methods 
to deliver deliberative dialogues at scale. 

05

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048040

5

Create spaces for innovative 
projects to spin up and 
respond to areas of need

FOUNDATION:

ai@cam  has  already  supported  teams  across  the  University  to  take  advantage  of  funding 
opportunities, potential collaborations, and new research resources. While continuing to deliver 
these functions in ‘responsive mode’ - for example, convening in response to large-scale funding 
opportunities - in the next year we will scale activities to deliver the 2022 ai@cam review vision 
of a hub for innovation.

FUTURE:

 → Our innovation initiative (working name: 
sciencepreneurship at Cambridge) will 
support researchers and external partners 
to experiment, prototype, and pilot AI 
innovations that respond to societal 
needs. In the near-term, this scheme 
will build bridges between researchers, 
entrepreneurs, and the local innovation 
ecosystem through workshops and 
training sessions that support students 
and researchers to build and scale their 
ideas. 

 → Lessons from this work - and from an 

in-depth review of the needs of the 
AI community - will be used to take 
forward the vision proposed in the 2022 
review of a new space that facilitates 
connections between AI researchers and 
experimentalists. This space is integrated 
into our long-term vision for AI at the 
University.

 → We will advance partnership discussions 

with potential strategic partners. 

Widen access to AI 
knowledge and skills

FOUNDATION:

Consultations  in  our  first  year  of  operation 
have identified scalability as a core challenge 
in  enabling  wider  access  to  AI  teaching  and 
learning  activities  across  the  University. 
Initiatives  in  year  two  will  experiment  with 
mechanisms  to  enable  a  wider  range  of 
students and staff to access relevant resources.

FUTURE:

 → A collaboration with Cambridge University 
Press and Assessment will pilot shareable 
teaching materials on core concepts 
in machine learning. Next steps in this 
collaboration will be confirmed after a 
feasibility study. 

 → We will leverage synergies with the 

Accelerate Programme for Scientific 
Discovery to support a pipeline of teaching 
and learning activities that can support 
a researcher to progress from learning 
programming skills, to understanding core 
concepts in data science and AI, through 
to deploying foundation models in their 
research. These activities will include 
hands-on workshops in using AI, study 
groups, and self-learning materials in core 
AI concepts. 

 → Lessons from these projects will inform the 
longer-term development of a carpentry-
style mechanism for scaling access to AI 
knowledge and skills across the University. 

05

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048042

5

Connect to national and 
Connect to national and 
international AI priorities
international AI priorities

FOUNDATION:
FOUNDATION:

Initial  Policy  Lab  activities  have  demonstrated  our  ability  to  convene  Cambridge  University 
Initial  Policy  Lab  activities  have  demonstrated  our  ability  to  convene  Cambridge  University 
expertise in response to national policy priorities. Following a soft-launch of this initiative in 
expertise in response to national policy priorities. Following a soft-launch of this initiative in 
autumn  2023,  ai@cam  will  develop  a  full  programme  of  activities,  including  workshops  with 
autumn  2023,  ai@cam  will  develop  a  full  programme  of  activities,  including  workshops  with 
CSaP and engagements with local government partners. 
CSaP and engagements with local government partners. 

FUTURE:
FUTURE:
 → The next phase of ai@cam’s Policy Lab 
 → The next phase of ai@cam’s Policy Lab 
will position Cambridge for influence in 
will position Cambridge for influence in 
a growing conversation about the use 
a growing conversation about the use 
of AI for public services. Starting with a 
of AI for public services. Starting with a 
collaboration across local governments 
collaboration across local governments 
in Greater Cambridgeshire, ai@cam 
in Greater Cambridgeshire, ai@cam 
will bring together researchers and 
will bring together researchers and 
policymakers to explore potential 
policymakers to explore potential 
applications of AI in public services, 
applications of AI in public services, 
prototype AI-enabled solutions to public 
prototype AI-enabled solutions to public 
sector challenges, and share lessons 
sector challenges, and share lessons 
learned through community-building and 
learned through community-building and 
case studies. 
case studies. 

 → Responsive policy engagement activities 
 → Responsive policy engagement activities 

will bring Cambridge University 
will bring Cambridge University 
researchers together to tackle issues 
researchers together to tackle issues 
of current concern at the interface of 
of current concern at the interface of 
research, innovation, and policy. For 
research, innovation, and policy. For 
example, CSaP workshops in April and 

May will convene industry leaders in 
example, CSaP workshops in April and 
the life sciences and policy leaders in 
May will convene industry leaders in 
education, respectively, to consider the 
the life sciences and policy leaders in 
impact of AI on their sectors. Further such 
education, respectively, to consider the 
engagements will be scoped in line with 
impact of AI on their sectors. Further such 
political developments in the next year, 
engagements will be scoped in line with 
and delivered through workshops, policy 
political developments in the next year, 
briefs and evidence synthesis, and horizon-
and delivered through workshops, policy 
scanning activities. 
briefs and evidence synthesis, and horizon-
scanning activities. 
international relationships through 
collaborations with strategic partners. ai@
international relationships through 
cam will support the International Team 
collaborations with strategic partners. ai@
to host a delegation of researchers and 
cam will support the International Team 
policymakers from Germany in June and 
to host a delegation of researchers and 
from Switzerland over the Summer.
policymakers from Germany in June and 
from Switzerland over the Summer.

 → ai@cam will also support the University’s 

 → ai@cam will also support the University’s 

Alongside these areas for action,  
ai@cam will continue to build its 
governance and strategy, including 
activities to convene its Steering  
Group, consult with the Cambridge  
AI community about its future  
direction, help the community respond  
to large-scale funding bids, and recruit  
a core team to drive mission progress.

05

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048Annex1
Steering 
Group  
Membership

044

7

06

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048046

John Aston

Colm-cille Caulfield

Diane Coyle

Neil Lawrence

Tim Minshall

Jessica Montgomery

Harding Professor of Statistics in 
Public Life, Department of Pure 
Mathematics

Professor of Environmental and 
Industrial Fluid Dynamics, Head 
of the Department of Applied 
Mathematics and Theoretical 
Physics, and co-Chair, C2D3

Bennett Professor of Public 
Policy, Bennett Institute

Department of Computer 
Science and Technology

Dr John C Taylor Professor 
of Innovation, Institute for 
Manufacturing

Director, ai@cam

Mireia Crispin

Anne Ferguson-Smith

Simon Godsill

Gina Neff

Carola-Bibiane 
Schönlieb

7

Assistant Professor, Integrated 
Cancer Medicine, Department of 
Oncology

Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research 
and International Partnerships)

Professor of Statistical 
Signal Processing and Head 
of Information Engineering, 
Department of Engineering

Executive Director, the Minderoo 
Centre for Technology & 
Democracy

Professor of Applied 
Mathematics, Department 
of Applied Mathematics and 
Theoretical Physics

06

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048048

Get in touch

8

For questions about this report, 
please email:  
contact@ai.cam.ac.uk

Visit:
ai.cam.ac.uk

Connect on X:
@ai_cam_mission

LinkedIn:
@ai-cambridge

SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048SECTIONANNUAL REPORT 2024 • AI@CAMSTARTFINISH048 
 
Annual

Report

2023 
–24

